

 

 

Preface

 

Originally I wrote Bhagavad—gitc‘i As It Is in the form in which it is
presented now. When this book was first published, the original manuscript
was, unfortunately, cut short to less than 400 pages, without illustrations and
without explanations for most of the original verses of the Srimad
Bhagavad—gitc‘i. In all of my other books—Srimad—Bhagavatam, Sri Is’opanisad,
etC.—the system is that I give the original verse, its English transliteration,
word-for-word Sanskrit-English equivalents, translations and purports. This
makes the book very authentic and scholarly and makes the meaning
seIf-evident. I was not very happy, therefore, when I had to minimize my
original manuscript. But later on, when the demand for Bhagavad-gitc‘t As It Is
considerably increased, I was requested by many scholars and devotees to
present the book in its original form. Thus the present attempt is to offer the
original manuscript of this great book of knowledge with full paramparc't
explanation in order to establish the Krsna consciousness movement more
soundly and progressively.

Our Krsna consciousness movement is genuine, historically authorized,
natural and transcendental due to its being based on Bhagavad-gitc‘t As It Is. It
is gradually becoming the most popular movement in the entire world,
especially amongst the younger generation. It is becoming more and more
interesting to the older generation also. Older gentlemen are becoming
interested, so much so that the fathers and grandfathers of my disciples are
encouraging us by becoming life members of our great society, the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness. In Los Angeles many fathers
and mothers used to come to see me to express their feelings of gratitude for
my leading the Krsna consciousness movement throughout the entire world.
Some of them said that it is greatly fortunate for the Americans that I have
started the Krsna consciousness movement in America. But actually the



original father of this movement is Lord Krsna Himself, since it was started a
very long time ago but is coming down to human society by disciplic
succession. If I have any credit in this connection, it does not belong to me
personally, but it is due to my eternal spiritual master, His Divine Grace Om
Visnupada Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya 108 Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja Prabhupada.

If personally I have any credit in this matter, it is only that I have tried to
present Bhagavad-gitc‘t as it is, without any adulteration. Before my
presentation of Bhagavad-gitc‘t As It Is, almost all the English editions of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t were introduced to fulfill someone’s personal ambition. But our
attempt, in presenting Bhagavad-gitc‘t As It Is, is to present the mission of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Our business is to present the will of
Krsna, not that of any mundane speculator like the politician, philosopher or
scientist, for they have very little knowledge of Krsna, despite all their other
knowledge. When Krsna says, man—manc‘i bhava mad—bhakto mad—yc‘iji mam
namaskmu [Bg. 18.65], etC., we, unlike the so-called scholars, do not say that
Krsna and His inner spirit are different. Krsna is absolute, and there is no
difference between Krsna’s name, Krsna’s form, Krsna’s qualities, Krsna’s
pastimes, etc. This absolute position of Krsna is difficult to understand for any
person who is not a devotee of Krsna in the system of paramparc't (disciplic
succession). Generally the so-called scholars, politicians, philosophers, and
svc‘tmis, without perfect knowledge of , try to banish or kill Krsna when
writing commentary on Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Such unauthorized commentary upon
Bhagavad-gitc‘i is known as Mayavc‘ida-bhc‘isya, and Lord Caitanya has warned us
about these unauthorized men. Lord Caitanya Clearly says that anyone who
tries to understand Bhagavad-gitc‘t from the Mayavadi point of View will
commit a great blunder. The result of such a blunder will be that the misguided
student of Bhagavad-gitc‘t will certainly be bewildered on the path of spiritual
guidance and will not be able to go back to home, back to Godhead.

Our only purpose is to present this Bhagavad-gitc‘t As It Is in order to guide
the conditioned student to the same purpose for which Krsna descends to this
planet once in a day of Brahma, or every 8,600,000,000 years. This purpose is
stated in Bhagavad-gitc‘t, and we have to accept it as it is; otherwise there is no



point in trying to understand the Bhagavad-gitc‘t and its speaker, Lord Krsna.
Lord Krsna first spoke Bhagavad-gitc‘t to the sun-god some hundreds of millions
of years ago. We have to accept this fact and thus understand the historical
significance of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, without misinterpretation, on the authority of
Krsna. T0 interpret Bhagavad-gitc‘t without any reference to the will of Krsna is
the greatest offense. In order to save oneself from this offense, one has to
understand the Lord as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as He was
directly understood by Arjuna, Lord Krsna’s first disciple. Such understanding
of Bhagavad-gitc‘t is really profitable and authorized for the welfare of human
society in fulfilling the mission of life.

The Krsna consciousness movement is essential in human society, for it
offers the highest perfection of life. How this is so is explained fully in the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Unfortunately, mundane wranglers have taken advantage of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t to push forward their demonic propensities and mislead people
regarding right understanding of the simple principles of life. Everyone should
know how God, or Krsna, is great, and everyone should know the factual
position of the living entities. Everyone should know that a living entity is
eternally a servant and that unless one serves Krsna one has to serve illusion
in different varieties of the three modes of material nature and thus wander
perpetually within the cycle of birth and death; even the so-called liberated
Mayavadi speculator has to undergo this process. This knowledge constitutes a
great science, and each and every living being has to hear it for his own
interest.

People in general, especially in this Age of Kali, are enamored by the
external energy of Krsna, and they wrongly think that by advancement of
material comforts every man will be happy. They have no knowledge that the
material or external nature is very strong, for everyone is strongly bound by
the stringent laws of material nature. A living entity is happily the part and
parcel of the Lord, and thus his natural function is to render immediate service
to the Lord. By the spell of illusion one tries to be happy by serving his
personal sense gratification in different forms which will never make him
happy. Instead of satisfying his own personal material senses, he has to satisfy
the senses of the Lord. That is the highest perfection of life. The Lord wants



this, and He demands it. One has to understand this central point of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Our Krsna consciousness movement is teaching the whole
world this central point, and because we are not polluting the theme of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t As It Is, anyone seriously interested in deriving benefit by
studying the Bhagavad-gitc‘t must take help from the Krsna consciousness
movement for practical understanding of Bhagavad-gitc‘t under the direct
guidance of the Lord. We hope, therefore, that people will derive the greatest
benefit by studying Bhagavad-gitc‘t As It Is as we have presented it here, and if
even one man becomes a pure devotee of the Lord, we shall consider our
attempt a success.

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

12 May, 1971
Sydney, Australia

 

Introduction

 

om ajﬁdna—timirc‘mdhasya
jﬁc‘mc‘iﬁjana—s’alc‘ikaya
caksm unmilitam yena
tasmai s’ri—gmave namah

s’ri-caitanya—mano—’bhistam
sthc‘ipitam yena bhﬁ-tale

svayam rﬁpah kadc‘i mahyam
dadc‘iti sva—padantikam

I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my
eyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him.
When will Srila Rfipa Gosvami Prabhupada, who has established within this
material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me
shelter under his lotus feet?



vande ’ham s’ri—gmoh s’ri-yuta—pada—kamalam s’ri—gmﬁn vaisnavc‘ims’ ca
s’ri—rﬁpam scigrajc‘itam saha—gana-raghum‘ithc‘mvitam tam sa—jivam
sadvaitam savadhﬁtam parijana—sahitam krsna—caitanya—devam
s’ri-rc‘idhc‘i—krsna—pc‘idan saha-gana—lalitc‘i—s’ri—vis’c‘ikhc‘mvitc‘ims’ ca

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master
and unto the feet of all Vaisnavas. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the
lotus feet of Srila Rfipa Gosvami along with his elder brother Sanatana
Gosvami, as well as Raghunatha Dasa and Raghunatha Bhatta, Gopala Bhatta,
and Srila Jiva Gosvami. I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Krsna
Caitanya and Lord Nityananda along with Advaita Acarya, Gadadhara,
Srivasa, and other associates. I offer my respectful obeisances to Srimati
Radharani and Sri Krsna along with Their associates Sri Lalita and Visakha.

he krsna karunc‘i-sindho
dina—bcmdho jagat—pate
gopes’a gopikc‘i—kc‘mta
rc‘tdhc‘i-kc‘mta namo ’stu te

O my dear Krsna, You are the friend of the distressed and the source of
creation. You are the master of the gopis and the lover of Radharani. I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.

tapta—kc‘iﬁcana—gamangi
radhe vrndavanes’vari
vrsabhc‘mu—sute devi
pranamc‘imi hari-priye

I offer my respects to Radharani, whose bodily complexion is like molten
gold and who is the Queen of Vrndavana. You are the daughter of King
Vrsabhanu, and You are very dear to Lord Krsna.

vaﬁcha—kalpatarubhyas’ ca
krpc‘i-smdhubhya eva ca
patitc‘mc‘im pcivanebhyo

vaisnavebhyo namo namah



I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaisnava devotees of the Lord.
They can fulfill the desires of everyone, just like desire trees, and they are full
of compassion for the fallen souls.

s’ri— krsna-caitanya
prabhu—nityc‘manda
s’ri—advaita gadadhara
s’rivc‘isc‘idi—gama—bhakta—Umda

I offer my obeisances to Sri Krsna Caitanya, Prabhu Nityananda, Sri
Advaita, Gadadhara, Srivasa and all others in the line of devotion.

hare krsna hare krsna
krsna krsna hare hare
hare rc‘rma hare 75mm
75mm 75mm hare hare

Bhagavad-gitc‘i is also known as Gitopcmisad. It is the essence of Vedic
knowledge and one of the most important Upcmisads in Vedic literature. Of
course there are many commentaries in English on the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, and one
may question the necessity for another one. This present edition can be
explained in the following way. Recently an American lady asked me to
recommend an English translation of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Of course in America
there are so many editions of Bhagavad-gitc‘t available in English, but as far as I
have seen, not only in America but also in India, none of them can be strictly
said to be authoritative because in almost every one of them the commentator
has expressed his own opinions without touching the spirit of Bhagavad-gitc‘t as
it is.

The spirit of Bhagavad-gitc‘i is mentioned in Bhagavad-gitc‘i itself. It is just
like this: If we want to take a particular medicine, then we have to follow the
directions written on the label. We cannot take the medicine according to our
own whim or the direction of a friend. It must be taken according to the
directions on the label or the directions given by a physician. Similarly,
Bhagavad-gitc‘t should be taken or accepted as it is directed by the speaker
Himself. The speaker of Bhagavad-gitc‘t is Lord Sri Krsna. He is mentioned on



every page of Bhagavad-gitc‘t as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Bhagavan. Of course the word bhagavc‘m sometimes refers to any powerful
person or any powerful demigod, and certainly here bhagavc‘m designates Lord
Sri Krsna as a great personality, but at the same time we should know that
Lord Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as is confirmed by all
great cicc'wyas (spiritual masters) like Sankaracarya, Ramanujacarya,
Madhvacarya, Nimbarka Svami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and many other
authorities of Vedic knowledge in India. The Lord Himself also establishes
Himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, and He
is accepted as such in the Brahma—samhitd and all the Purc‘mas, especially the
Srimad—Bhagavatam, known as the Bhagavata Purc‘ma (krsnas tu bhagavc‘m
svayam). Therefore we should take Bhagavad-gitc‘i as it is directed by the

Personality of Godhead Himself. In the Fourth Chapter of the Gité (4.1—3) the
Lord says:

imam vivasvate yogam
proktavc‘m aham avyayam

vivasvc‘m manave prc‘rha

manur iksvdkave ’bravit

[Bg. 4.1]

evam paramparc‘i—prc‘iptam
imam rc‘rjarsayo viduh
sa kaleneha mahatc‘i
yogo nastah paramapa

[Bg. 4.2]

sa evciyam mayc‘i te ’dya
yogah proktah purc‘itanah
bhakto ’si me sakhc‘i ceti
rahasyam hy etad uttamam

[Bg. 4.3]

Here the Lord informs Arjuna that this system of yoga, the Bhagavad-gitc‘i,
was first spoken to the sun-god, and the sun-god explained it to Mann, and



Manu explained it to Iksvaku, and in that way, by disciplic succession, one
speaker after another, this yoga system has been coming down. But in the
course of time it has become lost. Consequently the Lord has to speak it again,
this time to Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra.

He tells Arjuna that He is relating this supreme secret to him because
Arjuna is His devotee and His friend. The purport of this is that Bhagavad-gitc‘t
is a treatise which is especially meant for the devotee of the Lord. There are
three classes of transcendentalists, namely the jﬁc‘mi, the yogi and the bhakta,
or the impersonalist, the meditator and the devotee. Here the Lord clearly tells
Arjuna that He is making him the first receiver of a new parampai'c'i (disciplic
succession) because the old succession was broken. It was the Lord’s wish,
therefore, to establish another paramparc't in the same line of thought that was
coming down from the sun-god to others, and it was His wish that His teaching
be distributed anew by Arjuna. He wanted Arjuna to become the authority in
understanding the Bhagavad-gitc‘i. So we see that Bhagavad-gitc‘i is instructed to
Arjuna especially because Arjuna was a devotee of the Lord, a direct student
of Krsna, and His intimate friend. Therefore Bhagavad-gitc‘t is best understood
by a person who has qualities similar to Arjuna’s. That is to say he must be a
devotee in a direct relationship with the Lord. As soon as one becomes a
devotee of the Lord, he also has a direct relationship with the Lord. That is a
very elaborate subject matter, but briefly it can be stated that a devotee is in a
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in one of five different
ways:

1. One may be a devotee in a passive state;
2. One may be a devotee in an active state;
3. One may be a devotee as a friend;

4. One may be a devotee as a parent;

5. One may be a devotee as a conjugal lover.

Arjuna was in a relationship with the Lord as friend. Of course there is a
gulf of difference between this friendship and the friendship found in the
material world. This is transcendental friendship, which cannot be had by
everyone. Of course everyone has a particular relationship with the Lord, and



that relationship is evoked by the perfection of devotional service. But in the
present status of our life, not only have we forgotten the Supreme Lord, but we
have forgotten our eternal relationship with the Lord. Every living being, out
of the many, many billions and trillions of living beings, has a particular
relationship with the Lord eternally. That is called svcmlpa. By the process of
devotional service, one can revive that svcmlpa, and that stage is called
svarﬁpa-siddhi —perfection of one’s constitutional position. 80 Arjuna was a
devotee, and he was in touch with the Supreme Lord in friendship.

How Arjuna accepted this Bhagavad-gitc‘t should be noted. His manner of
acceptance is given in the Tenth Chapter (10.12—14):

arjuna uvc‘ica
param brahma param dhdma
pavitram paramam bhavc‘m
purusam s’c‘is’vatam divyam
adi—devam ajam Uibhum

ahus tvc‘im Tsayah sarve

devarsir nc‘wadas tathd
asito devalo vyc‘isah

svayam caiva bravisi me

sarvam etad Ttam manye
yam mam vadasi kes’ava

71a hi te bhagavcm vyaktim
vidm devc‘i 71a danavc‘ih

“Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the ultimate
abode, the purest, the Absolute Truth. You are the eternal, transcendental,
original person, the unborn, the greatest. All the great sages such as Narada,
Asita, Devala, and Vyasa confirm this truth about You, and now You Yourself
are declaring it to me. O Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that You have told
me. Neither the demigods nor the demons, O Lord, can understand Your
personality.”

After hearing Bhagavad-gitc‘t from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,



Arjuna accepted Krsna as param brahma, the Supreme Brahman. Every living
being is Brahman, but the supreme living being, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is the Supreme Brahman. Param dhc‘tma means that He is the
supreme rest or abode of everything; paviti‘am means that He is pure, untainted
by material contamination; pumsam means that He is the supreme enjoyer;
s’c‘is’vatam, original; divyam, transcendental; adi—devam, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; ajam, the unborn; and Uibhum, the greatest.

Now one may think that because Krsna was the friend of Arjuna, Arjuna
was telling Him all this by way of flattery, but Arjuna, just to drive out this
kind of doubt from the minds of the readers of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, substantiates
these praises in the next verse when he says that Krsna is accepted as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead not only by himself but by authorities like
Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasadeva. These are great personalities who
distribute the Vedic knowledge as it is accepted by all cicc'wyas. Therefore
Arjuna tells Krsna that he accepts whatever He says to be completely perfect.
Sarvam etad Ttam manye: “I accept everything You say to be true.” Arjuna also
says that the personality of the Lord is very difficult to understand and that He
cannot be known even by the great demigods. This means that the Lord
cannot even be known by personalities greater than human beings. So how
can a human being understand Lord Sri Krsna without becoming His devotee?

Therefore Bhagavad-gitc‘t should be taken up in a spirit of devotion. One
should not think that he is equal to Krsna, nor should he think that Krsna is
an ordinary personality or even a very great personality. Lord Sri Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. 80 according to the statements of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t or the statements of Arjuna, the person who is trying to
understand the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, we should at least theoretically accept Sri Krsna
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and with that submissive spirit we can
understand the Bhagavad-gitc‘i. Unless one reads the Bhagavad-gitc‘i in a
submissive spirit, it is very difficult to understand Bhagavad-gitc‘t, because it is a
great mystery.

Just what is the Bhagavad—gitc‘i? The purpose of Bhagavad-gitc‘i is to deliver
mankind from the nescience of material existence. Every man is in difficulty
in so many ways, as Arjuna also was in difficulty in having to fight the Battle



of Kuruksetra. Arjuna surrendered unto Sri Krsna, and consequently this
Bhagavad-gitc‘t was spoken. Not only Arjuna, but every one of us is full of
anxieties because of this material existence. Our very existence is in the
atmosphere of nonexistence. Actually we are not meant to be threatened by
nonexistence. Our existence is eternal. But somehow or other we are put into
asat. Asat refers to that which does not exist.

Out of so many human beings who are suffering, there are a few who are
actually inquiring about their position, as to what they are, why they are put
into this awkward position and so on. Unless one is awakened to this position
of questioning his suffering, unless he realizes that he doesn’t want suffering
but rather wants to make a solution to all suffering, then one is not to be
considered a perfect human being. Humanity begins when this sort of inquiry
is awakened in one’s mind. In the Brahma—sﬁtra this inquiry is called brahma
jijﬁc'isc'i. Athato brahma jijﬁc'isc'i. Every activity of the human being is to be
considered a failure unless he inquires about the nature of the Absolute.
Therefore those who begin to question why they are suffering or where they
came from and where they shall go after death are proper students for
understanding Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The sincere student should also have a firm
respect for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a student was Arjuna.

Lord Krsna descends specifically to reestablish the real purpose of life when
man forgets that purpose. Even then, out of many, many human beings who
awaken, there may be one who actually enters the spirit of understanding his
position, and for him this Bhagavad-gitc‘t is spoken. Actually we are all
swallowed by the tigress of nescience, but the Lord is very merciful upon living
entities, especially human beings. To this end He spoke the Bhagavad-gitc‘t,
making His friend Arjuna His student.

Being an associate of Lord Krsna, Arjuna was above all ignorance, but
Arjuna was put into ignorance on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra just to
question Lord Krsna about the problems of life so that the Lord could explain
them for the benefit of future generations of human beings and chalk out the
plan of life. Then man could act accordingly and perfect the mission of human

life.

The subject of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t entails the comprehension of five basic



truths. First of all, the science of God is explained and then the constitutional
position of the living entities, jivas. There is is’vai'a, which means the
controller, and there are jivas, the living entities which are controlled. If a
living entity says that he is not controlled but that he is free, then he is insane.
The living being is controlled in every respect, at least in his conditioned life.
So in the Bhagavad-gitc‘i the subject matter deals with the is’vara, the supreme
controller, and the jivas, the controlled living entities. Prakrti (material
nature) and time (the duration of existence of the whole universe or the
manifestation of material nature) and karma (activity) are also discussed. The
cosmic manifestation is full of different activities. All living entities are
engaged in different activities. From Bhagavad-gitc‘t we must learn what God is,
what the living entities are, what prakrti is, what the cosmic manifestation is,
how it is controlled by time, and what the activities of the living entities are.
Out of these five basic subject matters in Bhagavad-gitc‘t it is established that
the Supreme Godhead, or Krsna, or Brahman, or the supreme controller, or
Paramatma—you may use whatever name you like—is the greatest of all. The
living beings are in quality like the supreme controller. For instance, the Lord
has control over the universal affairs of material nature, as will be explained in
the later chapters of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Material nature is not independent. She is
acting under the directions of the Supreme Lord. As Lord Krsna says,
mayadhyaksena prakrtih sﬁyate sa-carc‘icaram: “This material nature is working
under My direction.” When we see wonderful things happening in the cosmic
nature, we should know that behind this cosmic manifestation there is a
controller. Nothing could be manifested without being controlled. It is childish
not to consider the controller. For instance, a child may think that an
automobile is quite wonderful to be able to run without a horse or other animal
pulling it, but a sane man knows the nature of the automobile’s engineering
arrangement. He always knows that behind the machinery there is a man, a
driver. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the driver under whose direction
everything is working. Now the jivas, or the living entities, have been accepted
by the Lord, as we will note in the later chapters, as His parts and parcels. A
particle of gold is also gold, a drop of water from the ocean is also salty, and
similarly we the living entities, being part and parcel of the supreme



controller, is’vai'a, or Bhagavan, Lord Sri Krsna, have all the qualities of the
Supreme Lord in minute quantity because we are minute is’vai'as, subordinate
is’varas. We are trying to control nature, as presently we are trying to control
space or planets, and this tendency to control is there because it is in Krsna.
But although we have a tendency to lord it over material nature, we should
know that we are not the supreme controller. This is explained in
Bhagavad—gitc‘i.

What is material nature.7 This is also explained in GMT as inferior prakrti,
inferior nature. The living entity is explained as the superior prakrti. Pmkrti is
always under control, whether inferior or superior. Pmkrti is female, and she is
controlled by the Lord just as the activities of a wife are controlled by the
husband. Pmkrti is always subordinate, predominated by the Lord, who is the
predominator. The living entities and material nature are both predominated,
controlled by the Supreme Lord. According to the Gita, the living entities,
although parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are to be considered prakrti.
This is clearly mentioned in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘i. Apareyam
itas w anyc‘im prakrtim viddhi me parc‘tm/ jiva—bhﬁtc‘im: “This material nature is
My inferior prakrti, but beyond this is another prakrti—jiva—bhﬁtc‘im, the living
entity.”

Material nature itself is constituted by three qualities: the mode of
goodness, the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. Above these modes
there is eternal time, and by a combination of these modes of nature and under
the control and purview of eternal time there are activities, which are called
karma. These activities are being carried out from time immemorial, and we
are suffering or enjoying the fruits of our activities. For instance, suppose I am
a businessman and have worked very hard with intelligence and have amassed
a great bank balance. Then I am an enjoyer. But then say I have lost all my
money in business; then I am a sufferer. Similarly, in every field of life we
enjoy the results of our work, or we suffer the results. This is called karma.

Is’vara (the Supreme Lord), jiva (the living entity), pmkrti (nature), kala
(eternal time) and karma (activity) are all explained in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Out
of these five, the Lord, the living entities, material nature and time are eternal.
The manifestation of pmkrti may be temporary, but it is not false. Some



philosophers say that the manifestation of material nature is false, but
according to the philosophy of Bhagavad-gitc‘t or according to the philosophy of
the Vaisnavas, this is not so. The manifestation of the world is not accepted as
false; it is accepted as real, but temporary. It is likened unto a cloud which
moves across the sky, or the coming of the rainy season, which nourishes
grains. As soon as the rainy season is over and as soon as the cloud goes away,
all the crops which were nourished by the rain dry up. Similarly, this material
manifestation takes place at a certain interval, stays for a while and then
disappears. Such are the workings of prakrti. But this cycle is working
eternally. Therefore pmkrti is eternal; it is not false. The Lord refers to this as
“My prakrti.” This material nature is the separated energy of the Supreme
Lord, and similarly the living entities are also the energy of the Supreme Lord,
although they are not separated but eternally related. 80 the Lord, the living
entity, material nature and time are all interrelated and are all eternal.
However, the other item, karma, is not eternal. The effects of karma may be
very old indeed. We are suffering or enjoying the results of our activities from
time immemorial, but we can change the results of our karma, or our activity,
and this change depends on the perfection of our knowledge. We are engaged
in various activities. Undoubtedly we do not know what sort of activities we
should adopt to gain relief from the actions and reactions of all these activities,
but this is also explained in the Bhagavad—gitc‘i.

The position of is’vai'a, the Supreme Lord, is that of supreme consciousness.
The jivas, or the living entities, being parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord,
are also conscious. Both the living entity and material nature are explained as
prakrti, the energy of the Supreme Lord, but one of the two, the jiva, is
conscious. The other pmkrti is not conscious. That is the difference. Therefore
the jiva-pmkrti is called superior because the jiva has consciousness which is
similar to the Lord’s. The Lord’s is supreme consciousness, however, and one
should not claim that the jiva, the living entity, is also supremely conscious.
The living being cannot be supremely conscious at any stage of his perfection,
and the theory that he can be so is a misleading theory. Conscious he may be,
but he is not perfectly or supremely conscious.

The distinction between the jiva and the is’vai'a will be explained in the



Thirteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘i. The Lord is ksetra—jﬁa, conscious, as is
the living being, but the living being is conscious of his particular body,
whereas the Lord is conscious of all bodies. Because He lives in the heart of
every living being, He is conscious of the psychic movements of the particular
jivas. We should not forget this. It is also explained that the Paramatma, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is living in everyone’s heart as is’vai'a, as the
controller, and that He is giving directions for the living entity to act as he
desires. The living entity forgets what to do. First of all he makes a
determination to act in a certain way, and then he is entangled in the actions
and reactions of his own karma. After giving up one type of body, he enters
another type of body, as we put on and take off clothes. As the soul thus
migrates, he suffers the actions and reactions of his past activities. These
activities can be changed when the living being is in the mode of goodness, in
sanity, and understands what sort of activities he should adopt. If he does so,
then all the actions and reactions of his past activities can be changed.
Consequently, karma is not eternal. Therefore we stated that of the five items
(is’vara, jiva, prakrti, time and karma) four are eternal, whereas karma is not
eternal.

The supreme conscious is’vai'a is similar to the living entity in this way: both
the consciousness of the Lord and that of the living entity are transcendental.
It is not that consciousness is generated by the association of matter. That is a
mistaken idea. The theory that consciousness develops under certain
circumstances of material combination is not accepted in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t.
Consciousness may be pervertedly reflected by the covering of material
circumstances, just as light reflected through colored glass may appear to be a
certain color, but the consciousness of the Lord is not materially affected. Lord
Krsna says, mayadhyaksena prakrtih [Bg. 9.10]. When He descends into the
material universe, His consciousness is not materially affected. If He were so
affected, He would be unfit to speak on transcendental matters as He does in
the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. One cannot say anything about the transcendental world
without being free from materially contaminated consciousness. So the Lord is
not materially contaminated. Our consciousness, at the present moment,
however, is materially contaminated. The Bhagavad-gitc‘t teaches that we have



to purify this materially contaminated consciousness. In pure consciousness,
our actions will be dovetailed to the will of is’vai'a, and that will make us happy.
It is not that we have to cease all activities. Rather, our activities are to be
purified, and purified activities are called bhakti. Activities in bhakti appear to
be like ordinary activities, but they are not contaminated. An ignorant person
may see that a devotee is acting or working like an ordinary man, but such a
person with a poor fund of knowledge does not know that the activities of the
devotee or of the Lord are not contaminated by impure consciousness or
matter. They are transcendental to the three modes of nature. We should
know, however, that at this point our consciousness is contaminated.

When we are materially contaminated, we are called conditioned. False
consciousness is exhibited under the impression that I am a product of material
nature. This is called false ego. One who is absorbed in the thought of bodily
conceptions cannot understand his situation. Bhagavad-gitc‘t was spoken to
liberate one from the bodily conception of life, and Arjuna put himself in this
position in order to receive this information from the Lord. One must become
free from the bodily conception of life; that is the preliminary activity for the
transcendentalist. One who wants to become free, who wants to become
liberated, must first of all learn that he is not this material body. Mukti, or
liberation, means freedom from material consciousness. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam also the definition of liberation is given. Muktir
hiwc‘myathc‘i—mpam svarﬁpena vyavasthitih: mukti means liberation from the
contaminated consciousness of this material world and situation in pure
consciousness. All the instructions of Bhagavad-gitc‘t are intended to awaken
this pure consciousness, and therefore we find at the last stage of the Gita’s
instructions that Krsna is asking Arjuna whether he is now in purified
consciousness. Purified consciousness means acting in accordance with the
instructions of the Lord. This is the whole sum and substance of purified
consciousness. Consciousness is already there because we are part and parcel of
the Lord, but for us there is the affinity of being affected by the inferior
modes. But the Lord, being the Supreme, is never affected. That is the
difference between the Supreme Lord and the small individual souls.

What is this consciousness? This consciousness is “I am.” Then what am I?



In contaminated consciousness “I am” means “I am the lord of all I survey. I am
the enjoyer.” The world revolves because every living being thinks that he is
the lord and creator of the material world. Material consciousness has two
psychic divisions. One is that I am the creator, and the other is that I am the
enjoyer. But actually the Supreme Lord is both the creator and the enjoyer,
and the living entity, being part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, is neither the
creator nor the enjoyer, but a cooperator. He is the created and the enjoyed.
For instance, a part of a machine cooperates with the whole machine; a part of
the body cooperates with the whole body. The hands, legs, eyes, and so on are
all parts of the body, but they are not actually the enjoyers. The stomach is the
enjoyer. The legs move, the hands supply food, the teeth chew, and all parts of
the body are engaged in satisfying the stomach because the stomach is the
principal factor that nourishes the body’s organization. Therefore everything is
given to the stomach. One nourishes the tree by watering its root, and one
nourishes the body by feeding the stomach, for if the body is to be kept in a
healthy state, then the parts of the body must cooperate to feed the stomach.
Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the enjoyer and the creator, and we, as
subordinate living beings, are meant to cooperate to satisfy Him. This
cooperation will actually help us, just as food taken by the stomach will help all
other parts of the body. If the fingers of the hand think that they should take
the food themselves instead of giving it to the stomach, then they will be
frustrated. The central figure of creation and of enjoyment is the Supreme
Lord, and the living entities are cooperators. By cooperation they enjoy. The
relation is also like that of the master and the servant. If the master is fully
satisfied, then the servant is satisfied. Similarly, the Supreme Lord should be
satisfied, although the tendency to become the creator and the tendency to
enjoy the material world are there also in the living entities because these
tendencies are there in the Supreme Lord who has created the manifested
cosmic world.

We shall find, therefore, in this Bhagavad-gitc‘t that the complete whole is
comprised of the supreme controller, the controlled living entities, the cosmic
manifestation, eternal time and karma, or activities, and all of these are
explained in this text. All of these taken completely form the complete whole,



and the complete whole is called the Supreme Absolute Truth. The complete
whole and the complete Absolute Truth are the complete Personality of
Godhead, Sri Krsna. All manifestations are due to His different energies. He is
the complete whole.

It is also explained in the Gita that impersonal Brahman is also subordinate
to the complete Supreme Person (brahmano hi pratisthc'iham). Brahman is more
explicitly explained in the Bmhma-sﬁtm to be like the rays of the sunshine.
The impersonal Brahman is the shining rays of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Impersonal Brahman is incomplete realization of the absolute whole,
and so also is the conception of Paramatma. In the Fifteenth Chapter it shall
be seen that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Purusottama, is above both
impersonal Brahman and the partial realization of Paramatma. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead is called sac-cid—c‘manda—vigraha. The Brahma—samhitd
begins in this way: is’varah paramah krsnah sac—cid—c‘manda—Uigrahah/ anadir adir
govindah sarva-kdmna—kamnam. “Govinda, Krsna, is the cause of all causes. He
is the primal cause, and He is the very form of eternity, knowledge and bliss.”
Impersonal Brahman realization is the realization of His sat (eternity) feature.
Paramatma realization is the realization of sat-cit (eternal knowledge). But
realization of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is realization of all the
transcendental features: sat, Cit and cincmda (eternity, knowledge, and bliss) in
complete Uigraha (form).

People with less intelligence consider the Supreme Truth to be impersonal,
but He is a transcendental person, and this is confirmed in all Vedic
literatures. Nityo nityc‘mc‘im cetcmas’ cetanc‘mc‘im. (Katha Upcmisad 2.2.13) As we
are all individual living beings and have our individuality, the Supreme
Absolute Truth is also, in the ultimate issue, a person, and realization of the
Personality of Godhead is realization of all of the transcendental features in
His complete form. The complete whole is not formless. If He is formless, or if
He is less than any other thing, then He cannot be the complete whole. The
complete whole must have everything within our experience and beyond our
experience, otherwise it cannot be complete.

The complete whole, Personality of Godhead, has immense potencies
(parasya s’aktir vividhaiva s’rﬁyate). How Krsna is acting in different potencies is



also explained in Bhagavad-gitc‘t. This phenomenal world or material world in
which we are placed is also complete in itself because the twenty-four elements
of which this material universe is a temporary manifestation, according to
Sankhya philosophy, are completely adjusted to produce complete resources
which are necessary for the maintenance and subsistence of this universe.
There is nothing extraneous, nor is there anything needed. This manifestation
has its own time fixed by the energy of the supreme whole, and when its time
is complete, these temporary manifestations will be annihilated by the
complete arrangement of the complete. There is complete facility for the small
complete units, namely the living entities, to realize the complete, and all sorts
of incompleteness are experienced due to incomplete knowledge of the
complete. 80 Bhagavad-gitc‘t contains the complete knowledge of Vedic wisdom.

All Vedic knowledge is infallible, and Hindus accept Vedic knowledge to be
complete and infallible. For example, cow dung is the stool of an animal, and
according to smrti, or Vedic injunction, if one touches the stool of an animal
he has to take a bath to purify himself. But in the Vedic scriptures cow dung is
considered to be a purifying agent. One might consider this to be
contradictory, but it is accepted because it is Vedic injunction, and indeed by
accepting this, one will not commit a mistake; subsequently it has been proved
by modern science that cow dung contains all antiseptic properties. 80 Vedic
knowledge is complete because it is above all doubts and mistakes, and
Bhagavad-gitc‘t is the essence of all Vedic knowledge.

Vedic knowledge is not a question of research. Our research work is
imperfect because we are researching things with imperfect senses. We have to
accept perfect knowledge which comes down, as is stated in Bhagavad-gitc‘t, by
the parampai'c'i (disciplic succession). We have to receive knowledge from the
proper source in disciplic succession beginning with the supreme spiritual
master, the Lord Himself, and handed down to a succession of spiritual
masters. Arjuna, the student who took lessons from Lord Sri Krsna, accepts
everything that He says without contradicting Him. One is not allowed to
accept one portion of Bhagavad-gitc‘t and not another. No. We must accept
Bhagavad-gitc‘t without interpretation, without deletion and without our own
whimsical participation in the matter. The Gitc'i should be taken as the most



perfect presentation of Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is received from
transcendental sources, and the first words were spoken by the Lord Himself.
The words spoken by the Lord are called apamuseya, meaning that they are
different from words spoken by a person of the mundane world who is infected
with four defects. A mundaner (1) is sure to commit mistakes, (2) is invariably
illusioned, (3) has the tendency to cheat others and (4) is limited by imperfect
senses. With these four imperfections, one cannot deliver perfect information
of all-pervading knowledge.

Vedic knowledge is not imparted by such defective living entities. It was
imparted unto the heart of Brahma, the first created living being, and Brahma
in his turn disseminated this knowledge to his sons and disciples, as he
originally received it from the Lord. The Lord is pﬁmam, all-perfect, and there
is no possibility of His becoming subjected to the laws of material nature. One
should therefore be intelligent enough to know that the Lord is the only
proprietor of everything in the universe and that He is the original creator,
the creator of Brahma. In the Eleventh Chapter the Lord is addressed as
prapitc‘imaha [Bg. 11.39] because Brahma is addressed as pitc‘tmaha, the
grandfather, and He is the creator of the grandfather. So no one should claim
to be the proprietor of anything; one should accept only things which are set
aside for him by the Lord as his quota for his maintenance.

There are many examples given of how we are to utilize those things which
are set aside for us by the Lord. This is also explained in Bhagavad-gitc‘t. In the
beginning, Arjuna decided that he should not fight in the Battle of
Kuruksetra. This was his own decision. Arjuna told the Lord that it was not
possible for him to enjoy the kingdom after killing his own kinsmen. This
decision was based on the body because he was thinking that the body was
himself and that his bodily relations or expansions were his brothers, nephews,
brothers-in-law, grandfathers and so on. Therefore he wanted to satisfy his
bodily demands. Bhagavad-gitc‘t was spoken by the Lord just to change this
View, and at the end Arjuna decides to fight under the directions of the Lord
when he says, karisye vacanam tava [Bg. 18.73]: “I shall act according to Your
word.”

In this world men are not meant for quarreling like cats and dogs. Men



must be intelligent to realize the importance of human life and refuse to act
like ordinary animals. A human being should realize the aim of his life, and
this direction is given in all Vedic literatures, and the essence is given in
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Vedic literature is meant for human beings, not for animals.
Animals can kill other living animals, and there is no question of sin on their
part, but if a man kills an animal for the satisfaction of his uncontrolled taste,
he must be responsible for breaking the laws of nature. In the Bhagavad-gitc‘t it
is clearly explained that there are three kinds of activities according to the
different modes of nature: the activities of goodness, of passion and of
ignorance. Similarly, there are three kinds of eatables also: eatables in
goodness, passion and ignorance. All of this is clearly described, and if we
properly utilize the instructions of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, then our whole life will
become purified, and ultimately we will be able to reach the destination which
is beyond this material sky. [Bg. 15.6]

That destination is called the sandtana sky, the eternal, spiritual sky. In this
material world we find that everything is temporary. It comes into being, stays
for some time, produces some by-products, dwindles and then vanishes. That is
the law of the material world, whether we use as an example this body, or a
piece of fruit or anything. But beyond this temporary world there is another
world of which we have information. That world consists of another nature,
which is sanc‘itcma, eternal. Jim is also described as sanatana, eternal, and the
Lord is also described as sandtana in the Eleventh Chapter. We have an
intimate relationship with the Lord, and because we are all qualitatively
one—the sanc‘itana—dhc‘ima, or sky, the sam‘itana Supreme Personality and the
sam‘itana living entities—the whole purpose of Bhagavad-gitc‘i is to revive our
sam‘itana occupation, or sandtana-dharma, which is the eternal occupation of
the living entity. We are temporarily engaged in different activities, but all of
these activities can be purified when we give up all these temporary activities
and take up the activities which are prescribed by the Supreme Lord. That is
called our pure life.

The Supreme Lord and His transcendental abode are both sanatcma, as are
the living entities, and the combined association of the Supreme Lord and the
living entities in the sandtana abode is the perfection of human life. The Lord



is very kind to the living entities because they are His sons. Lord Krsna
declares in Bhagavad-gitc‘i, sarUa—yonisu. .. aham bija—pradah pita: “I am the
father of all.” Of course there are all types of living entities according to their
various karmas, but here the Lord claims that He is the father of all of them.
Therefore the Lord descends to reclaim all of these fallen, conditioned souls, to
call them back to the sam‘itana eternal sky so that the samitana living entities
may regain their eternal sandtana positions in eternal association with the
Lord. The Lord comes Himself in different incarnations, or He sends His
confidential servants as sons or His associates or cicc'wyas to reclaim the
conditioned souls.

Therefore, sam'itana-dhai‘ma does not refer to any sectarian process of
religion. It is the eternal function of the eternal living entities in relationship
with the eternal Supreme Lord. Sandtana-dharma refers, as stated previously,
to the eternal occupation of the living entity. Sripada Ramanujacarya has
explained the word sam'itana as “that which has neither beginning nor end,” so
when we speak of samitana-dharma, we must take it for granted on the
authority of Sripada Ramanujacarya that it has neither beginning nor end.

The English world religion is a little different from sanc‘itana-dharma.
Religion conveys the idea of faith, and faith may change. One may have faith
in a particular process, and he may change this faith and adopt another, but
sam'itana-dhai‘ma refers to that activity which cannot be changed. For
instance, liquidity cannot be taken from water, nor can heat be taken from
fire. Similarly, the eternal function of the eternal living entity cannot be
taken from the living entity. Sandtana-dharma is eternally integral with the
living entity. When we speak of samitana-dharma, therefore, we must take it
for granted on the authority of Sripada Ramanujacarya that it has neither
beginning nor end. That which has neither end nor beginning must not be
sectarian, for it cannot be limited by any boundaries. Those belonging to some
sectarian faith will wrongly consider that sam'itana-dhai‘ma is also sectarian,
but if we go deeply into the matter and consider it in the light of modern
science, it is possible for us to see that sam'itana-dhai‘ma is the business of all
the people of the world—nay, of all the living entities of the universe.

Non-sanc‘ttana religious faith may have some beginning in the annals of



human history, but there is no beginning to the history of samitana-dharma,
because it remains eternally with the living entities. Insofar as the living
entities are concerned, the authoritative s’c‘tstms state that the living entity has
neither birth nor death. In the Gita it is stated that the living entity is never
born and he never dies. He is eternal and indestructible, and he continues to
live after the destruction of his temporary material body. In reference to the
concept of sandtana-dharma, we must try to understand the concept of religion
from the Sanskrit root meaning of the word. Dharma refers to that which is
constantly existing with a particular object. We conclude that there is heat
and light along with the fire; without heat and light, there is no meaning to
the word fire. Similarly, we must discover the essential part of the living being,
that part which is his constant companion. That constant companion is his
eternal quality, and that eternal quality is his eternal religion.

When Sanatana Gosvami asked Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu about the
svarﬁpa of every living being, the Lord replied that the svcmlpa, or
constitutional position, of the living being is the rendering of service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If we analyze this statement of Lord
Caitanya’s, we can easily see that every living being is constantly engaged in
rendering service to another living being. A living being serves other living
beings in various capacities. By doing so, the living entity enjoys life. The
lower animals serve human beings as servants serve their master. A serves B
master, B serves C master, and C serves D master and so on. Under these
circumstances, we can see that one friend serves another friend, the mother
serves the son, the wife serves the husband, the husband serves the wife and so
on. If we go on searching in this spirit, it will be seen that there is no exception
in the society of living beings to the activity of service. The politician presents
his manifesto for the public to convince them of his capacity for service. The
voters therefore give the politician their valuable votes, thinking that he will
render valuable service to society. The shopkeeper serves the customer, and
the artisan serves the capitalist. The capitalist serves the family, and the family
serves the state in the terms of the eternal capacity of the eternal living being.
In this way we can see that no living being is exempt from rendering service to
other living beings, and therefore we can safely conclude that service is the



constant companion of the living being and that the rendering of service is the
eternal religion of the living being.

Yet man professes to belong to a particular type of faith with reference to
particular time and circumstance and thus claims to be a Hindu, Muslim,
Christian, Buddhist or an adherent of any other sect. Such designations are
non—sanc‘ttana-dharma. A Hindu may change his faith to become a Muslim, or
a Muslim may change his faith to become a Hindu, or a Christian may change
his faith and so on. But in all circumstances the change of religious faith does
not affect the eternal occupation of rendering service to others. The Hindu,
Muslim or Christian in all circumstances is servant of someone. Thus, to
profess a particular type of faith is not to profess one’s samitana-dharma. The
rendering of service is sanc‘itana-dharma.

Factually we are related to the Supreme Lord in service. The Supreme Lord
is the supreme enjoyer, and we living entities are His servitors. We are created
for His enjoyment, and if we participate in that eternal enjoyment with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, we become happy. We cannot become happy
otherwise. It is not possible to be happy independently, just as no one part of
the body can be happy without cooperating with the stomach. It is not possible
for the living entity to be happy without rendering transcendental loving
service unto the Supreme Lord.

In the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, worship of different demigods or rendering service to
them is not approved. It is stated in the Seventh Chapter, twentieth verse:

kamais tais tair hrta-jﬁc‘mc‘ih
prapadyante ’nya-devatc‘ih
mm mm niyamam asthc‘iya
prakrtyci m'yatc‘ih svayc‘i

“Those whose intelligence has been stolen by material desires surrender
unto demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship
according to their own natures.” Here it is plainly said that those who are
directed by lust worship the demigods and not the Supreme Lord Krsna. When
we mention the name Krsna, we do not refer to any sectarian name. Krsna
means the highest pleasure, and it is confirmed that the Supreme Lord is the



reservoir or storehouse of all pleasure. We are all hankering after pleasure.
Ananda—mayo ’bhyc‘isc‘it (Vedimta—sﬁtra 1.1.12). The living entities, like the Lord,
are full of consciousness, and they are after happiness. The Lord is perpetually
happy, and if the living entities associate with the Lord, cooperate with Him
and take part in His association, then they also become happy.

The Lord descends to this mortal world to show His pastimes in Vrndavana,
which are full of happiness. When Lord Sri Krsna was in Vrndavana, His
activities with His cowherd boyfriends, with His damsel friends, with the other
inhabitants of Vrndavana and with the cows were all full of happiness. The
total population of Vrndavana knew nothing but Krsna. But Lord Krsna even
discouraged His father Nanda Maharaja from worshiping the demigod Indra,
because He wanted to establish the fact that people need not worship any
demigod. They need only worship the Supreme Lord, because their ultimate
goal is to return to His abode.

The abode of Lord Sri Krsna is described in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, Fifteenth
Chapter, sixth verse:

71a tad bhasayate sﬁryo

71a s’as’dnko 71a pavakah

yad gawa na m'vartante
tad dhdma paramam mama

“That supreme abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
fire or electricity. Those who reach it never return to this material world.”

This verse gives a description of that eternal sky. Of course we have a
material conception of the sky, and we think of it in relationship to the sun,
moon, stars and so on, but in this verse the Lord states that in the eternal sky
there is no need for the sun nor for the moon nor electricity or fire of any kind
because the spiritual sky is already illuminated by the brahmajyoti, the rays
emanating from the Supreme Lord. We are trying with difficulty to reach
other planets, but it is not difficult to understand the abode of the Supreme
Lord. This abode is referred to as Goloka. In the Brahma-samhita (5.37) it is
beautifully described: goloka eva nivasaty akhilc‘itma—bhﬁtah. The Lord resides
eternally in His abode Goloka, yet He can be approached from this world, and



to this end the Lord comes to manifest His real form, sac—cid—c‘manda-vigmha
[B3. 5.1]. When He manifests this form, there is no need for our imagining what
He looks like. To discourage such imaginative speculation, He descends and
exhibits Himself as He is, as Syamasundara. Unfortunately, the less intelligent
deride Him because He comes as one of us and plays with us as a human being.
But because of this we should not consider the Lord one of us. It is by His
omnipotency that He presents Himself in His real form before us and displays
His pastimes, which are replicas of those pastimes found in His abode.

In the effulgent rays of the spiritual sky there are innumerable planets
ﬂoating. The brahmajyoti emanates from the supreme abode, Krsnaloka, and
the c‘manda-maya, cin—maya planets, which are not material, float in those rays.
The Lord says, 71a tad bhasayate sﬁryo 71a s’as’dnko 71a pcivakah/ yad gawc‘i 71a
nivartcmte tad dhdma paramam mama [Bg. 15.6]. One who can approach that
spiritual sky is not required to descend again to the material sky. In the
material sky, even if we approach the highest planet (Brahmaloka), what to
speak of the moon, we will find the same conditions of life, namely birth,
death, disease and old age. No planet in the material universe is free from
these four principles of material existence.

The living entities are traveling from one planet to another, but it is not
that we can go to any planet we like merely by a mechanical arrangement. If
we desire to go to other planets, there is a process for going there. This is also
mentioned: yc‘mti deva-watc‘i devc‘m pitfn yc‘mti pitT—watc‘ih [Bg. 9.25]. No
mechanical arrangement is necessary if we want interplanetary travel. The
Gitc‘i instructs: yc‘mti deva-watc‘i devc‘m. The moon, the sun and higher planets
are called Svargaloka. There are three different statuses of planets: higher,
middle and lower planetary systems. The earth belongs to the middle planetary
system. Bhagavad-gitc‘t informs us how to travel to the higher planetary systems
(Devaloka) with a very simple formula: yc‘mti deva-watc'i devc'm. One need only
worship the particular demigod of that particular planet and in that way go to
the moon, the sun or any of the higher planetary systems.

Yet Bhagavad-gitc‘t does not advise us to go to any of the planets in this
material world, because even if we go to Brahmaloka, the highest planet,
through some sort of mechanical contrivance by maybe traveling for forty



thousand years (and who would live that long?), we will still find the material
inconveniences of birth, death, disease and old age. But one who wants to
approach the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, or any of the other planets within
the spiritual sky, will not meet with these material inconveniences. Amongst
all of the planets in the spiritual sky there is one supreme planet called Goloka
Vrndavana, which is the original planet in the abode of the original
Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna. All of this information is given in
Bhagavad-gitc‘t, and we are given through its instruction information how to
leave the material world and begin a truly blissful life in the spiritual sky.

In the Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the real picture of the
material world is given. It is said there:

mdhva-mﬁlam adhah-s’c‘ikham
as’vattham prc‘thm avyayam
chandamsi yasya pamc‘mi
yas tam veda sa veda—Uit

Here the material world is described as a tree whose roots are upwards and
branches are below. We have experience of a tree whose roots are upward: if
one stands on the bank of a river or any reservoir of water, he can see that the
trees reflected in the water are upside down. The branches go downward and
the roots upward. Similarly, this material world is a reflection of the spiritual
world. The material world is but a shadow of reality. In the shadow there is no
reality or substantiality, but from the shadow we can understand that there are
substance and reality. In the desert there is no water, but the mirage suggests
that there is such a thing as water. In the material world there is no water,
there is no happiness, but the real water of actual happiness is there in the
spiritual world.

The Lord suggests that we attain the spiritual world in the following
manner (Bg. 15.5):

nirmc‘ma-mohc‘i jita—sanga—dosc‘i
adhyc‘itma—nityc‘i vinivrtta-kc‘imc‘ih
dvandvair Uimuktc‘ih sukha—duhkha—samjﬁair

gacchcmty amﬁdhc‘ih padam avyayam tat



That padam avyayam, or eternal kingdom, can be reached by one who is
nirmc‘ma-moha. What does this mean? We are after designations. Someone
wants to become “sir,” someone wants to become “lord,” someone wants to
become the president or a rich man or a king or something else. As long as we
are attached to these designations, we are attached to the body, because
designations belong to the body. But we are not these bodies, and realizing this
is the first stage in spiritual realization. We are associated with the three modes
of material nature, but we must become detached through devotional service
to the Lord. If we are not attached to devotional service to the Lord, then we
cannot become detached from the modes of material nature. Designations and
attachments are due to our lust and desire, our wanting to lord it over the
material nature. As long as we do not give up this propensity of lording it over
material nature, there is no possibility of returning to the kingdom of the
Supreme, the sandtana-dhc‘tma. That eternal kingdom, which is never
destroyed, can be approached by one who is not bewildered by the attractions
of false material enjoyments, who is situated in the service of the Supreme
Lord. One so situated can easily approach that supreme abode.

Elsewhere in the G175 (8.21) it is stated:

avyakto ’ksara ity uktas
tam ahuh paramam gatim
yam prcipya na nivartcmte
tad dhdma paramam mama

Avyakta means unmanifested. Not even all of the material world is
manifested before us. Our senses are so imperfect that we cannot even see all
of the stars within this material universe. In Vedic literature we can receive
much information about all the planets, and we can believe it or not believe it.
All of the important planets are described in Vedic literatures, especially
Srimad-Bhagavatam, and the spiritual world, which is beyond this material sky,
is described as avyakta, unmanifested. One should desire and hanker after that
supreme kingdom, for when one attains that kingdom, he does not have to
return to this material world.

Next, one may raise the question of how one goes about approaching that



abode of the Supreme Lord. Information of this is given in the Eighth
Chapter. It is said there:

ama—kc‘ile ca mam eva
smamn mukwd kalevaram
yah prayc‘iti sa mad—bhc‘wam
yc‘rti misty atra sams’ayah

“Anyone who quits his body, at the end of life, remembering Me, attains
immediately to My nature; and there is no doubt of this.” [Bg. 8.5] One who
thinks of Krsna at the time of his death goes to Krsna. One must remember the
form of Krsna; if he quits his body thinking of this form, he surely approaches
the spiritual kingdom. Mad-bhc‘wam refers to the supreme nature of the
Supreme Being. The Supreme Being is sac—cid—c‘manda—Uigmha [Bs. 5.1]—that
is, His form is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. Our present body is not
sac—cid—c‘manda. It is asat, not sat. It is not eternal; it is perishable. It is not cit,
full of knowledge, but it is full of ignorance. We have no knowledge of the
spiritual kingdom, nor do we even have perfect knowledge of this material
world, where there are so many things unknown to us. The body is also
nirc‘manda; instead of being full of bliss it is full of misery. All of the miseries
we experience in the material world arise from the body, but one who leaves
this body thinking of Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at
once attains a sac-cid—c‘manda body.

The process of quitting this body and getting another body in the material
world is also organized. A man dies after it has been decided what form of body
he will have in the next life. Higher authorities, not the living entity himself,
make this decision. According to our activities in this life, we either rise or
sink. This life is a preparation for the next life. If we can prepare, therefore, in
this life to get promotion to the kingdom of God, then surely, after quitting
this material body, we will attain a spiritual body just like the Lord’s.

As explained before, there are different kinds of transcendentalists—the
brahma—vc‘idi, paramdtma—vc‘idi and the devotee—and, as mentioned, in the
brahmajyoti (spiritual sky) there are innumerable spiritual planets. The
number of these planets is far, far greater than all of the planets of this



material world. This material world has been approximated as only one quarter
of the creation (ekc'ims’ena sthito jagat). In this material segment there are
millions and billions of universes with trillions of planets and suns, stars and
moons. But this whole material creation is only a fragment of the total
creation. Most of the creation is in the spiritual sky. One who desires to merge
into the existence of the Supreme Brahman is at once transferred to the
brahmajyoti of the Supreme Lord and thus attains the spiritual sky. The
devotee, who wants to enjoy the association of the Lord, enters into the
Vaikuntha planets, which are innumerable, and the Supreme Lord by His
plenary expansions as Narayana with four hands and with different names like
Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Govinda associates with him there. Therefore at
the end of life the transcendentalists think either of the brahmajyoti, the
Paramatma or Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna. In all cases they
enter into the spiritual sky, but only the devotee, or he who is in personal
touch with the Supreme Lord, enters into the Vaikuntha planets or the
Goloka Vrndavana planet. The Lord further adds that of this “there is no
doubt.” This must be believed firmly. We should not reject that which does not
tally with our imagination; our attitude should be that of Arjuna: “I believe
everything that You have said.” Therefore when the Lord says that at the time
of death whoever thinks of Him as Brahman or Paramatma or as the
Personality of Godhead certainly enters into the spiritual sky, there is no
doubt about it. There is no question of disbelieving it.

The Bbagavad—gité (8.6) also explains the general principle that makes it
possible to enter the spiritual kingdom simply by thinking of the Supreme at
the time of death:

yam yam Udpi smarcm bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya
sadc‘i tad-bhdUa—bhc‘witah

“Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his present body, in
his next life he will attain to that state without fail.” Now, first we must
understand that material nature is a display of one of the energies of the



Supreme Lord. In the Visrm P1115413 (6.7.61) the total energies of the Supreme
Lord are delineated:

visnu—s’aktih para proktc‘i

ksetra—jﬁc‘ikhyc‘i tathd para

avidya—karma-samjﬁanya
trtiyc‘i s’aktir isyate

[Cc. Madhya 6.154]

The Supreme Lord has diverse and innumerable energies which are beyond
our conception; however, great learned sages or liberated souls have studied
these energies and have analyzed them into three parts. All of the energies are
of Uisnu-s’akti, that is to say they are different potencies of Lord Visnu. The
first energy is para, transcendental. Living entities also belong to the superior
energy, as has already been explained. The other energies, or material energies,
are in the mode of ignorance. At the time of death either we can remain in the
inferior energy of this material world, or we can transfer to the energy of the
spiritual world. So the Bbagavad—gité (8.6) says:

yam yam Udpi smarcm bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya
sadc‘i tad-bhdUa—bhc‘witah

“Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his present body, in
his next life he will attain to that state without fail.”

In life we are accustomed to thinking either of the material or of the
spiritual energy. Now, how can we transfer our thoughts from the material
energy to the spiritual energy? There are so many literatures which fill our
thoughts with the material energy—newspapers, magazines, novels, etc. Our
thinking, which is now absorbed in these literatures, must be transferred to the
Vedic literatures. The great sages, therefore, have written so many Vedic
literatures, such as the Puranas. The Purc‘mas are not imaginative; they are
historical records. In the Caitanya—caritc‘imrta (Madhya 20.122) there is the
following verse:



mciyc‘t—mugdha jivera nc‘rhi svatah krsna—jﬁc‘ma
jivere krpc‘iya kailc‘i krsna veda—pmc‘ma

The forgetful living entities or conditioned souls have forgotten their
relationship with the Supreme Lord, and they are engrossed in thinking of
material activities. Just to transfer their thinking power to the spiritual sky,
Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa has given a great number of Vedic literatures. First he
divided the Vedas into four, then he explained them in the Purc‘mas, and for
less capable people he wrote the Mahabharata. In the Mahabharata there is
given the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Then all Vedic literature is summarized in the
Vedimta-sﬁtm, and for future guidance he gave a natural commentation on the
Vedimta—sﬁtm, called Srimad—Bhagavatam. We must always engage our minds
in reading these Vedic literatures. Just as materialists engage their minds in
reading newspapers, magazines and so many materialistic literatures, we must
transfer our reading to these literatures which are given to us by Vyasadeva; in
that way it will be possible for us to remember the Supreme Lord at the time of
death. That is the only way suggested by the Lord, and He guarantees the
result: “There is no doubt.”

tasmc‘it sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
mam evaisyasy asams’ayah

“Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krsna
and at the same time continue your prescribed duty of fighting. With your
activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me, you
will attain Me without doubt.” (Bg. 8.7)

He does not advise Arjuna simply to remember Him and give up his
occupation. No, the Lord never suggests anything impractical. In this material
world, in order to maintain the body one has to work. Human society is
divided, according to work, into four divisions of social order—brc‘thmana,
ksam'ya, vais’ya and s’ﬁdra. The brc‘rhmana class or intelligent class is working in
one way, the ksati'iya or administrative class is working in another way, and



the mercantile class and the laborers are all tending to their specific duties. In
the human society, whether one is a laborer, merchant, administrator or
farmer, or even if one belongs to the highest class and is a literary man, a
scientist or a theologian, he has to work in order to maintain his existence.
The Lord therefore tells Arjuna that he need not give up his occupation, but
while he is engaged in his occupation he should remember Krsna (mam
anusmam [Bg. 8.7]). If he doesn’t practice remembering Krsna while he is
struggling for existence, then it will not be possible for him to remember Krsna
at the time of death. Lord Caitanya also advises this. He says, kirtcmiyah sadc'i
harih: [Cc. adi 17.31] one should practice chanting the names of the Lord
always. The names of the Lord and the Lord are nondifferent. 80 Lord Krsna’s
instructions to Arjuna to “remember Me” and Lord Caitanya’s injunction to
“always chant the names of Lord Krsna” are the same instruction. There is no
difference, because Krsna and Krsna’s name are nondifferent. In the absolute
status there is no difference between reference and referrent. Therefore we
have to practice remembering the Lord always, twenty-four hours a day, by
chanting His names and molding our life’s activities in such a way that we can
remember Him always.

How is this possible? The cicc'n‘yas give the following example. If a married
woman is attached to another man, or if a man has an attachment for a woman
other than his wife, then the attachment is to be considered very strong. One
with such an attachment is always thinking of the loved one. The wife who is
thinking of her lover is always thinking of meeting him, even while she is
carrying out her household chores. In fact, she carries out her household work
even more carefully so her husband will not suspect her attachment. Similarly,
we should always remember the supreme lover, Sri Krsna, and at the same time
perform our material duties very nicely. A strong sense of love is required here.
If we have a strong sense of love for the Supreme Lord, then we can discharge
our duty and at the same time remember Him. But we have to develop that
sense of love. Arjuna, for instance, was always thinking of Krsna; he was the
constant companion of Krsna, and at the same time he was a warrior. Krsna
did not advise him to give up fighting and go to the forest to meditate. When
Lord Krsna delineates the yoga system to Arjuna, Arjuna says that the practice



of this system is not possible for him.

arjuna uvc‘ica
yo ’yam yogas tvayc‘i proktah
scimyena madhusﬁdana
etasyc‘iham 71a pas’yc‘imi
caﬁcalawc‘it sthitim sthirc‘im

“Arjuna said: O Madhusfidana, the system of yoga which You have
summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is
restless and unsteady.” (Bg. 6.33)

But the Lord says:

yogim‘im api sarvesc‘im
mad—gatenc‘mtarc‘itmand
s’raddhc‘wc‘m bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah

“Of all yogis, the one with great faith who always abides in Me, thinks of Me
within himself, and renders transcendental loving service to Me is the most
intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all. That is My
opinion.” (Bg. 6.47) So one who thinks of the Supreme Lord always is the
greatest yogi, the supermost jﬁc‘mi, and the greatest devotee at the same time.
The Lord further tells Arjuna that as a ksati'iya he cannot give up his fighting,
but if Arjuna fights remembering Krsna, then he will be able to remember
Krsna at the time of death. But one must be completely surrendered in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord.

We work not with our body, actually, but with our mind and intelligence.
80 if the intelligence and the mind are always engaged in the thought of the
Supreme Lord, then naturally the senses are also engaged in His service.
Superficially, at least, the activities of the senses remain the same, but the
consciousness is changed. The Bhagavad-gitc‘t teaches one how to absorb the
mind and intelligence in the thought of the Lord. Such absorption will enable
one to transfer himself to the kingdom of the Lord. If the mind is engaged in
Krsna’s service, then the senses are automatically engaged in His service. This



is the art, and this is also the secret of Bhagavad-gitc‘t: total absorption in the
thought of Sri Krsna.

Modern man has struggled very hard to reach the moon, but he has not
tried very hard to elevate himself spiritually. If one has fifty years of life ahead
of him, he should engage that brief time in cultivating this practice of
remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This practice is the
devotional process:

s’ravanam kmanam Uisnoh
smaranam pada—sevanam
arcanam vandanam dasyam

sakhyam citma—nivedanam
( grimad-Bbégavatam 7.5.23)

These nine processes, of which the easiest is s’mvanam, hearing the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t from the realized person, will turn one to the thought of the
Supreme Being. This will lead to remembering the Supreme Lord and will
enable one, upon leaving the body, to attain a spiritual body which is just fit
for association with the Supreme Lord.

The Lord further says:

abhyc‘isa-yoga—yuktena

cetasc‘i nc‘mya—gc‘immc‘i
paramam purusam divyam

yc‘rti parthc‘mucintayan

“He who meditates on Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind
constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, 0
Arjuna, is sure to reach Me.” (Bg. 8.8)

This is not a very difficult process. However, one must learn it from an
experienced person. Tad vijﬁc‘mc‘mham sa gurum evc‘tbhigacchet: [MU 1.2.12(3)]
one must approach a person who is already in the practice. The mind is always
ﬂying to this and that, but one must practice concentrating the mind always
on the form of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, or on the sound of His name. The
mind is naturally restless, going hither and thither, but it can rest in the sound



Vibration of Krsna. One must thus meditate on paramam pumsam, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in the spiritual kingdom, the spiritual sky,
and thus attain Him. The ways and the means for ultimate realization,
ultimate attainment, are stated in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, and the doors of this
knowledge are open for everyone. No one is barred out. All classes of men can
approach Lord Krsna by thinking of Him, for hearing and thinking of Him is
possible for everyone.

The Lord further says (Bg. 9.32—33):

mam hi pc‘mha vyapcis’ritya
ye ’pi syuh papa—yonayah

striyo vais’yc‘is tathd s’ﬁdrc‘is
te ’pi yc‘mti parc‘m’t gatim

kim punar brc‘thmanc‘ih puma
bhaktc‘i rc‘rjarsayas tathd
anityam asukham lokam

imam prc‘tpya bhajasva mam

Thus the Lord says that even a merchant, a fallen woman or a laborer or
even human beings in the lowest status of life can attain the Supreme. One
does not need highly developed intelligence. The point is that anyone who
accepts the principle of bhakti-yoga and accepts the Supreme Lord as the
summum bonum of life, as the highest target, the ultimate goal, can approach
the Lord in the spiritual sky. If one adopts the principles enunciated in
Bhagavad-gitc‘t, he can make his life perfect and make a permanent solution to
all the problems of life. This is the sum and substance of the entire
Bhagavad—gitc‘i.

In conclusion, Bhagavad-gitc‘t is a transcendental literature which one
should read very carefully. Gita—s’c‘istram idam punyam yah pathet prayatah
pumc‘m: if one properly follows the instructions of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, one can be
freed from all the miseries and anxieties of life. Bhaya-s’okc'idi-Uarjitah. One will
be freed from all fears in this life, and one’s next life will be spiritual.
(Gita—mc‘ihc‘itmya 1)

There is also a further advantage:



gitc‘idhyc‘iyana—s’ilasya
pranciyama—parasya ca

naiva santi hi papdni
pﬁrva—janma—krtc‘mi ca

“If one reads Bhagavad-gitc‘t very sincerely and with all seriousness, then by
the grace of the Lord the reactions of his past misdeeds will not act upon him.”

(Gite‘t-mc‘thc‘ttmya 2) The Lord says very loudly in the last portion of
Bhagavad-gitc‘i (18.66):

sarva—dharmc‘m parityajya

mam ekam s’aranam waja

aham tvc‘m’t sarva-pcipebhyo
moksayisyc‘imi ma s’ucah

“Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear.” Thus the Lord takes all
responsibility for one who surrenders unto Him, and He indemnifies such a
person against all reactions of sins.

maline mocanam pumsc‘im
jala—sm‘mam dine dine
sakrd gitc‘imrta—sm‘mam
samsc‘wa—mala—m‘is’anam

“One may cleanse himself daily by taking a bath in water, but if one takes a
bath even once in the sacred Ganges water of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, for him the dirt
of material life is altogether vanquished.” (Gite‘t-mc‘thc‘ttmya 3)

gm? su—gitc‘i kartavyc‘i
kim anyaih s’c‘istra—vistaraih
ya svayam padmanc‘ibhasya
mukha—padmc‘id UinihSTtCT

Because Bhagavad-gitc‘t is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
one need not read any other Vedic literature. One need only attentively and
regularly hear and read Bhagavad-gitc‘t. In the present age, people are so



absorbed in mundane activities that it is not possible for them to read all the
Vedic literatures. But this is not necessary. This one book, Bhagavad-gitc‘t, will
suffice, because it is the essence of all Vedic literatures and especially because
it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (Gita-mahatmya 4)

As it is said:

bharatc‘imrta—sarvasvam

visnu—vaktrc‘id vinihsrtam
gitc‘i—gangodakam piwc‘i
punar jcmma 71a vidyate

“One who drinks the water of the Ganges attains salvation, so what to
speak of one who drinks the nectar of Bhagavad—gitc‘i? Bhagavad-gitc‘i is the
essential nectar of the Mahabharata, and it is spoken by Lord Krsna Himself,
the original Visnu.” (Gita—mc‘ihc‘itmya 5) Bhagavad-gitc‘i comes from the mouth
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the Ganges is said to emanate
from the lotus feet of the Lord. Of course, there is no difference between the
mouth and the feet of the Supreme Lord, but from an impartial study we can
appreciate that Bhagavad-gitc‘t is even more important than the water of the
Ganges.

sarvopanisado gc‘wo
dogdhc‘i gopc‘ila-nandanah
pc‘mho vatsah su—dhir bhoktc‘i
dugdham gitc‘imrtam mahat

“This Gitopcmisad, Bhagavad-gitc‘i, the essence of all the Upcmisads, is just
like a cow, and Lord Krsna, who is famous as a cowherd boy, is milking this
cow. Arjuna is just like a calf, and learned scholars and pure devotees are to
drink the nectarean milk of Bhagavad—gitc‘i.” (Gita—mc‘ihc‘itmya 6)

ekam s’c‘istram devaki—putra—gitam
eko devo devaki-putm eva
eko mantras tasya nc‘tmc‘mi yc‘mi
karmapy ekam tasya devasya sevc‘i
(Gita—mc‘ihc‘itmya 7)



In this present day, people are very much eager to have one scripture, one
God, one religion, and one occupation. Therefore, ekam s’c‘tstmm
devaki-putm-gitam: let there be one scripture only, one common scripture for
the whole world—Bhagavad—gitc‘i. Eko devo devaki-putm eva: let there be one
God for the whole world—Sri Krsna. Eko mantras tasya nc‘rmc‘mi: and one
hymn, one mantra, one prayer—the chanting of His name: Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. Karmapy ekam tasya devasya sevc‘i: and let there be one work only—the
service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

THE DISCIPLIC SUCCESSION

Evam paramparc‘i—prc‘iptam imam rc‘rjarsayo viduh (Bbagavad—gité 4.2). This
Bhagavad-gitc‘t As It Is is received through this disciplic succession:

1. Krsna 17. Brahmanya Tirtha

2. Brahma 18. Vyasa Tirtha

3. Narada 19. Laksmipati

4. Vyasa 20. Madhavendra Puri

5. Madhva 21. Is’vara Puri, (Nityananda, Advaita)
6. Padmanabha 22. Lord Caitanya

7. thari 23. Rfipa, (Svarfipa, Sanatana)

8. Madhava 24. Raghunatha, Jiva

9. Aksobhya 25. Krsnadasa

10. ]aya Tirtha
11. Jﬁanasindhu
12. Dayanidhi
13. Vidyanidhi
14. Rajendra
15. Jayadharma

16. Purusottama

Prabhupada

26. Narottama

27. Vis’vanatha

28. (Baladeva) ]agannatha

29. Bhaktivinoda

30. Gaurakis’ora

31. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati

32. A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami



 

Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra

TEXT 1

W331?!
uﬁﬁéwﬁéaﬁmwn
szwﬁamﬁamuau

dhrtarc‘istra uvc‘ica
dharma—ksetre kum—ksetre
samavetc‘t yuyutsavah
mamakc‘ih pandavc‘is’ caiva
kim akmvata saﬁjaya

SYNONYMS

dhrtarc‘istmh uvdca—King Dhrtarastra said; dharma—ksetre—in the place of
pilgrimage; kum-ksetre—in the place named Kuruksetra;
samavetc‘ih—assembled; yuyutsavah—desiring to fight; mcimakcih—my party
(sons); pandavc‘ih—the sons of Pandu; ca—and; eva—certainly; kim—what;
akurvata—did they do; saﬂjaya—O Saﬁjaya.

TRANSLATION

Dhrtarastra said: O Saﬁjaya, after my sons and the sons of Pandu assembled
in the place of pilgrimage at Kuruksetra, desiring to fight, What did they do?

PURPORT



Bhagavad-gitc‘t is the widely read theistic science summarized in the
Gita-mc‘ihc‘itmya (Glorification of the Gita). There it says that one should read
Bhagavad-gitc‘t very scrutinizingly with the help of a person who is a devotee of
Sri Krsna and try to understand it without personally motivated
interpretations. The example of clear understanding is there in the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t itself, in the way the teaching is understood by Arjuna, who
heard the Gita directly from the Lord. If someone is fortunate enough to
understand Bhagavad-gitc‘t in that line of disciplic succession, without
motivated interpretation, then he surpasses all studies of Vedic wisdom, and all
scriptures of the world. One will find in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t all that is contained
in other scriptures, but the reader will also find things which are not to be
found elsewhere. That is the specific standard of the Gita. It is the perfect
theistic science because it is directly spoken by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna.

The topics discussed by Dhrtarastra and Saﬁjaya, as described in the
Mahabharata, form the basic principle for this great philosophy. It is
understood that this philosophy evolved on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra,
which is a sacred place of pilgrimage from the immemorial time of the Vedic
age. It was spoken by the Lord when He was present personally on this planet
for the guidance of mankind.

The word dharma-ksetm (a place where religious rituals are performed) is
significant because, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead was present on the side of Arjuna. Dhrtarastra, the father of the
Kurus, was highly doubtful about the possibility of his sons’ ultimate Victory. In
his doubt, he inquired from his secretary Saﬁjaya, “What did they do?” He was
confident that both his sons and the sons of his younger brother Pandu were
assembled in that Field of Kuruksetra for a determined engagement of the war.
Still, his inquiry is significant. He did not want a compromise between the
cousins and brothers, and he wanted to be sure of the fate of his sons on the
battlefield. Because the battle was arranged to be fought at Kuruksetra, which
is mentioned elsewhere in the Vedas as a place of worship—even for the
denizens of heaven—Dhrtarastra became very fearful about the inﬂuence of
the holy place on the outcome of the battle. He knew very well that this would



influence Arjuna and the sons of Pandu favorably, because by nature they
were all Virtuous. Saﬁjaya was a student of Vyasa, and therefore, by the mercy
of Vyasa, Saﬁjaya was able to envision the Battlefield of Kuruksetra even while
he was in the room of Dhrtarastra. And so, Dhrtarastra asked him about the
situation on the battlefield.

Both the Pandavas and the sons of Dhrtarastra belong to the same family,
but Dhrtarastra’s mind is disclosed herein. He deliberately claimed only his
sons as Kurus, and he separated the sons of Pandu from the family heritage.
One can thus understand the specific position of Dhrtarastra in his
relationship with his nephews, the sons of Pandu. As in the paddy field the
unnecessary plants are taken out, so it is expected from the very beginning of
these topics that in the religious field of Kuruksetra, where the father of
religion, Sri Krsna, was present, the unwanted plants like Dhrtarastra’s son
Duryodhana and others would be wiped out and the thoroughly religious
persons, headed by Yudhisthira, would be established by the Lord. This is the
significance of the words dharma—ksetre and kuru-ksetre, apart from their
historical and Vedic importance.

TEXT 2

WW?
EIQWWREWI
WWWIIQII

saﬁjaya uvc‘ica
drstvc‘i tu pandavc‘mikam
vyﬁdham dmyodhanas tadc‘i
acaryam upasangamya
rc‘rjci vacanam abravit

SYNONYMS

saﬂjayah uvc‘ica—Saﬁjaya said; drstvc‘i—after seeing; tu—but;



pandava—anikam—the soldiers of the Pandavas; vyﬁdham—arranged in a
military phalanx; dmyodhcmah—King Duryodhana; tadc't—at that time;
acaryam—the teacher; upasangamya—approaching; rc‘tjc‘r—the king;
vacanam—words; abravit—spoke.

TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said: 0 King, after looking over the army arranged in military
formation by the sons of Pandu, King Duryodhana went to his teacher and
spoke the following words.

PURPORT

Dhrtarastra was blind from birth. Unfortunately, he was also bereft of
spiritual Vision. He knew very well that his sons were equally blind in the
matter of religion, and he was sure that they could never reach an
understanding with the Pandavas, who were all pious since birth. Still he was
doubtful about the inﬂuence of the place of pilgrimage, and Saﬁjaya could
understand his motive in asking about the situation on the battlefield. Saﬁjaya
wanted, therefore, to encourage the despondent king and thus assured him
that his sons were not going to make any sort of compromise under the
inﬂuence of the holy place. Saﬁjaya therefore informed the king that his son,
Duryodhana, after seeing the military force of the Pandavas, at once went to
the commander in chief, Dronacarya, to inform him of the real position.
Although Duryodhana is mentioned as the king, he still had to go to the
commander on account of the seriousness of the situation. He was therefore
quite fit to be a politician. But Duryodhana’s diplomatic veneer could not
disguise the fear he felt when he saw the military arrangement of the
Pandavas.

TEXT 3

WWWWI



WWWWWIIBII

pas’yaitc‘im pandu—putrc‘mc‘im
acc‘wya mahatim camﬁm
vyﬁdhc‘im drupada—putrena
tava s’isyena dhimatc‘i

SYNONYMS

pas’ya—behold; etc‘rm—this; pandu—putrc‘mam—of the sons of Pandu;
acc‘wya—O teacher; mahatim—great; camﬁm—military force;
vyﬁdhc‘im—arranged; drupada-putrena—by the son of Drupada; tava—your;
s’isyena—disciple; dhi—matc‘t—very intelligent.

TRANSLATION

O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pandu, so expertly
arranged by your intelligent disciple the son of Drupada.

PURPORT

Duryodhana, a great diplomat, wanted to point out the defects of
Dronacarya, the great brc‘thmana commander in chief. Dronacarya had some
political quarrel with King Drupada, the father of Draupadi, who was Arjuna’s
wife. As a result of this quarrel, Drupada performed a great sacrifice, by which
he received the benediction of having a son who would be able to kill
Dronacarya. Dronacarya knew this perfectly well, and yet as a liberal
brc‘thmana he did not hesitate to impart all his military secrets when the son of
Drupada, Dhrstadyumna, was entrusted to him for military education. Now, on
the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, Dhrstadyumna took the side of the Pandavas,
and it was he who arranged for their military phalanx, after having learned the
art from Dronacarya. Duryodhana pointed out this mistake of Dronacarya’s so
that he might be alert and uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wanted
to point out also that he should not be similarly lenient in battle against the



Pandavas, who were also Dronacarya’s affectionate students. Arjuna,
especially, was his most affectionate and brilliant student. Duryodhana also
warned that such leniency in the fight would lead to defeat.

TEXT 4

aaxgrnéﬁmwﬁmjﬁmgfhl
Wheat ma W3: "8 ||

atra s’mc‘i mahesv-c‘isc‘i
bhimc‘wjuna-samc‘i yudhi
yuyudhc‘mo viratas’ ca
drupadas’ ca mahc‘i—rathah

SYNONYMS

atra—here; s’mc‘ih—heroes; mahc‘i—isu—c‘isc‘ih—mighty bowmen;
bhima—arjuna—to Bhima and Arjuna; samah—equal; yudhi—in the fight;
yuyudhc‘mah—Yuyudhana; viratah—Virata; ca—also; drupadah—Drupada;
ca—also; mahc‘i—rathah—great fighter.

TRANSLATION

Here in this army are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bhima and
Arjuna: great fighters like Yuyudhana, Virata and Drupada.

PURPORT

Even though Dhrstadyumna was not a very important obstacle in the face
of Dronacarya’s very great power in the military art, there were many others
who were causes of fear. They are mentioned by Duryodhana as great
stumbling blocks on the path of Victory because each and every one of them
was as formidable as Bhima and Arjuna. He knew the strength of Bhima and
Arjuna, and thus he compared the others with them.



TEXT 5

WW: ma aﬁam
Wise ﬁat; W: H 2 ||

dhrstaketus’ cekitc‘mah

kds’irc‘ijas’ ca viryavc‘m

purujit kuntibhojas’ ca
s’aibyas’ ca nara—pungavah

SYNONYMS
dhrstaketuh—Dhrstaketu; cekitc‘mah—Cekitana; kas’irc‘ijah—Kas’iraja; ca—also;
virya—vc‘m—very powerful; purujit—Purujit; kuntibhojah—Kuntibhoja;
ca—and; s’aibyah—Saibya; ca—and; nara-pungavah—hero in human society.

TRANSLATION

There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhrstaketu, Cekitana,
Kas’iraja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Saibya.

TEXT 6

Wﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁaraaa‘ﬁam
WWaHémwwulau

yudhc‘imanyus’ ca vikrc‘mta
uttamaujc‘is’ ca viryavc‘m

saubhadro draupadeyc‘is’ ca
sarva eva mahc‘i—rathc‘ih

SYNONYMS



yudhc‘imanyuh—Yudhamanyu; ca—and; vikrc‘mtah—mighty;
uttamaujc‘ih—Uttamauja; ca—and; virya—vc‘m—very powerful;
saubhadrah—the son of Subhadra; draupadeyc‘ih—the sons of Draupadi;
ca—and; sarUe—all; eva—certainly; mahc‘i—rathc‘ih—great chariot fighters.

TRANSLATION

There are the mighty Yudhamanyu, the very powerful Uttamauja, the son of
Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi. All these warriors are great chariot fighters.

TEXT 7

Wamﬁarﬁa‘miﬁsﬁﬁm
wmmaeﬁaﬁaﬁﬁﬁueu

asmc‘ikam tu vis’istc‘i ye
tc‘m m'bodha dvijottama
nciyakc‘i mama sainyasya
samjﬁc‘irtham tc‘m bravimi te

SYNONYMS

asmc‘ikam—our; tu—but; vis’istc‘ih—especially powerful; ye—who; tc‘m—them;
nibodha—just take note of, be informed; dvija—uttama—O best of the
brahmanas; nciyakc‘ih—captains; mama—my; sainyasya—of the soldiers;
samjﬁc‘i—artham—for information; tc‘m—them; bravimi—I am speaking; te—to
you.

TRANSLATION

But for your information, 0 best of the brahmanas, let me tell you about the
captains Who are especially qualified to lead my military force.

TEXT 8



Waﬁagqaaﬁrﬁiwu
ammaainﬁﬁﬁﬁaauw

bhavc‘m bhismas’ ca kamas’ ca
krpas’ ca samitim—jayah
as’vatthc‘imc‘i vikamas’ ca
saumadattis tathaiva ca

SYNONYMS

bhavc‘m—your good self; bhismah—Grandfather Bhisma; ca—also;
kamah—Karna; ca—and; krpah—Krpa; ca—and; samitim—jayah—always
Victorious in battle; as’vatthc‘imc‘i—As’vatthama; vikamah—Vikarna; ca—as well
as; saumadattih—the son of Somadatta; tathd—as well as; eva—certainly;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

There are personalities like you, Bhisma, Karna, Krpa, As’vatthama, Vikarna
and the son of Somadatta called Bhﬁris’rava, Who are always Victorious in battle.

PURPORT

Duryodhana mentions the exceptional heroes in the battle, all of whom are
ever Victorious. Vikarna is the brother of Duryodhana, As’vatthama is the son
of Dronacarya, and Saumadatti, or Bhﬂrisrava, is the son of the King of the
Bahlikas. Karna is the half brother of Arjuna, as he was born of Kunti before
her marriage with King Pandu. Krpacarya’s twin sister married Dronacarya.

TEXT 9

aﬁeasawgrnaéimﬁﬁﬁmzl



Wzaéaeﬁimulsll

anye ca bahavah §17Li‘67
mad—arthe tyakta—jivitc‘ih
m‘mc‘i—s’astra—praharanah
sarve yuddha—vis’c‘iradah

SYNONYMS

anye—others; ca—also; bahavah—in great numbers; s’mc‘ih—heroes;
mat-arthe—for my sake; tyakta—jivitc‘ih—prepared to risk life; nc‘mc‘i—many;
s’astra—weapons; praharanc‘ih—equipped with; sarve—all of them;
yuddha-vis’c‘wadah—experienced in military science.

TRANSLATION

There are many other heroes Who are prepared to lay down their lives for my
sake. All of them are well equipped With different kinds of weapons, and all are
experienced in military science.

PURPORT

As far as the others are concerned—like Jayadratha, Krtavarma and
Salya—all are determined to lay down their lives for Duryodhana’s sake. In
other words, it is already concluded that all of them would die in the Battle of
Kuruksetra for joining the party of the sinful Duryodhana. Duryodhana was, of
course, confident of his Victory on account of the above-mentioned combined
strength of his friends.

TEXT 10

mmwwm.
WWHE‘SWII‘MII



aparyc‘iptam tad asmc‘ikam
balam bhismc‘ibhiraksitam
paryc‘iptam w idam etesdm
balam bhimc‘ibhiraksitam

SYNONYMS

aparyc‘iptam—immeasurable; tat—that; asmc‘ikam—of ours; balam—strength;
bhisma—by Grandfather Bhisma; abhiraksitam—perfectly protected;
paryc‘iptam—limited; tu—but; idam—all this; etesc‘im—of the Pandavas;
balam—strength; bhima—by Bhima; abhiraksitam—carefully protected.

TRANSLATION

Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather
Bhisma, Whereas the strength of the Pandavas, carefully protected by Bhima, is
limited.

PURPORT

Herein an estimation of comparative strength is made by Duryodhana. He
thinks that the strength of his armed forces is immeasurable, being specifically
protected by the most experienced general, Grandfather Bhisma. On the other
hand, the forces of the Pandavas are limited, being protected by a less
experienced general, Bhima, who is like a fig in the presence of Bhisma.
Duryodhana was always envious of Bhima because he knew perfectly well that
if he should die at all, he would only be killed by Bhima. But at the same time,
he was confident of his Victory on account of the presence of Bhisma, who was
a far superior general. His conclusion that he would come out of the battle
Victorious was well ascertained.

TEXT 11
3mg 3 8&5; awwmﬁaaiz I



WRW:HEIQH%IIWII

aycmesu ca sarvesu

yathc‘i-bhc‘igam avasthitc‘ih

bhismam evc‘tbhiraksamu
bhavamah sarva eva hi

SYNONYMS

aycmesu—in the strategic points; ca—also; sarvesu—everywhere;
yathc‘i—bhc‘igam—as differently arranged; avasthitc‘ih—situated; bhismam—unto
Grandfather Bhisma; eva—certainly; abhimksantu—should give support;
bhavcmtah—you; sarve—all respectively; eva hi—certainly.

TRANSLATION

All of you must now give full support to Grandfather Bhisma, as you stand
at your respective strategic points of entrance into the phalanx of the army.

PURPORT

Duryodhana, after praising the prowess of Bhisma, further considered that
others might think that they had been considered less important, so in his
usual diplomatic way, he tried to adjust the situation in the above words. He
emphasized that Bhismadeva was undoubtedly the greatest hero, but he was an
old man, so everyone must especially think of his protection from all sides. He
might become engaged in the fight, and the enemy might take advantage of his
full engagement on one side. Therefore, it was important that other heroes not
leave their strategic positions and allow the enemy to break the phalanx.
Duryodhana clearly felt that the Victory of the Kurus depended on the
presence of Bhismadeva. He was confident of the full support of Bhismadeva
and Dronacarya in the battle because he well knew that they did not even
speak a word when Arjuna’s wife Draupadi, in her helpless condition, had
appealed to them for justice while she was being forced to appear naked in the



presence of all the great generals in the assembly. Although he knew that the
two generals had some sort of affection for the Pandavas, he hoped that these
generals would now completely give it up, as they had done during the
gambling performances.

TEXT 12

WWW:W:I
fﬁmﬁﬁmﬁﬁ‘mewﬁmunu

tasya saﬁjanayan harsam
kmu—Urddhah pitc‘rmahah
Simha—nc‘idam vinadyoccaih
s’ar’tkham dadhmau pratc‘ipavcin

SYNONYMS

tasya—his; saﬁjanayan—increasing; harsam—cheerfulness;
kuru—vrddhah—the grandsire of the Kuru dynasty (Bhisma); pitamahah—the
grandfather; Simha-nadam—roaring sound, like that of a lion;
vinadya—Vibrating; uccaih—very loudly; s’ar’tkham—conchshell;
dadhmau—blew; pratc‘ipa—Uc‘m—the valiant.

TRANSLATION

Then Bhisma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the
grandfather of the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly, making a sound like
the roar of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy.

PURPORT

The grandsire of the Kuru dynasty could understand the inner meaning of
the heart of his grandson Duryodhana, and out of his natural compassion for
him he tried to cheer him by blowing his conchshell very loudly, befitting his



position as a lion. Indirectly, by the symbolism of the conchshell, he informed
his depressed grandson Duryodhana that he had no chance of Victory in the
battle, because the Supreme Lord Krsna was on the other side. But still, it was
his duty to conduct the fight, and no pains would be spared in that connection.

TEXT 13

EH: we ﬁx WW: I
aaﬁamm-‘cr H WSW" 93 u

tatah s’ar’tkhc‘is’ ca bheryas’ ca
panavanaka—gomukhah
sahasaivabhyahanyanta
sa s’abdas tumulo ’bhavat

SYNONYMS

tatah—thereafter; sankhc'ih—conchshells; ca—also; bheryah—large drums;
ca—and; panava—c‘maka—small drums and kettledrums; go—mukhc‘ih—horns;
sahasc‘i—all of a sudden; eva—certainly; abhyahanyanta—were simultaneously
sounded; sah—that; s’abdah—combined sound; tumulah—tumultuous;
abhavat—became.

TRANSLATION

After that, the conchshells, drums, bugles, trumpets and horns were all
suddenly sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.

TEXT 14

aazaﬁﬁtiﬁsneﬁraaﬁﬁqail
W:W§aﬁaﬁﬂ§imzuaau



tatah s’vetair hayair yukte
mahati sycmdane sthitau
mddhavah pandavas’ caiva
divyau s’cmkhau pradadhmamh

SYNONYMS

tatah—thereafter; s’vetaih—with white; hayaih—horses; yukte—being yoked;
mahati—in a great; sycmdane—chariot; sthitau—situated; madhavah—Krsna
(the husband of the goddess of fortune); pcindavah—Arjuna (the son of
Pandu); ca—also; eva—certainly; divyau—transcendental;
s’ar’tkhau—conchshells; pradadhmamh—sounded.

TRANSLATION

On the other side, both Lord Krsna and Arjuna, stationed on a great chariot
drawn by White horses, sounded their transcendental conchshells.

PURPORT

In contrast with the conchshell blown by Bhismadeva, the conchshells in
the hands of Krsna and Arjuna are described as transcendental. The sounding
of the transcendental conchshells indicated that there was no hope of Victory
for the other side because Krsna was on the side of the Pandavas. Jayas tu
pandu—putrc‘mc‘im yesc‘m’t pakse janc‘irdanah. Victory is always with persons like
the sons of Pandu because Lord Krsna is associated with them. And whenever
and wherever the Lord is present, the goddess of fortune is also there because
the goddess of fortune never lives alone without her husband. Therefore,
Victory and fortune were awaiting Arjuna, as indicated by the transcendental
sound produced by the conchshell of Visnu, or Lord Krsna. Besides that, the
chariot on which both the friends were seated had been donated by Agni (the
fire-god) to Arjuna, and this indicated that this chariot was capable of
conquering all sides, wherever it was drawn over the three worlds.



TEXT15
WWWWWN
Wﬁmﬁnﬁﬁauwu

paﬁcajanyam hrsikes’o
devadattam dhanaﬁjayah
paundram dadhmau mahc‘r—s’ankham
bhima—karma vrkodarah

SYNONYMS

paﬁcajanyam—the conchshell named Paﬁcajanya; hrsika—is’ah—Hrsikes’a
(Krsna, the Lord who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam—the
conchshell named Devadatta; dhanam-jayah—Dhanaﬁjaya (Arjuna, the
winner of wealth); paundram—the conch named Paundra; dadhmau—blew;
mahc‘I—s’ankham—the terrific conchshell; bhima-karmc‘r—one who performs
herculean tasks; vrka-udamh—the voracious eater (Bhima).

TRANSLATION

Lord Krsna blew His conchshell, called Paﬁcajanya; Arjuna blew his, the
Devadatta; and Bhima, the voracious eater and performer of herculean tasks,
blew his terrific conchshell, called Paundra.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna is referred to as Hrsikes’a in this verse because He is the owner
of all senses. The living entities are part and parcel of Him, and therefore the
senses of the living entities are also part and parcel of His senses. The
impersonalists cannot account for the senses of the living entities, and
therefore they are always anxious to describe all living entities as senseless, or
impersonal. The Lord, situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs their
senses. But He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity, and in the



case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on the Battlefield
of Kuruksetra the Lord directly controls the transcendental senses of Arjuna,
and thus His particular name of Hrsikes’a. The Lord has different names
according to His different activities. For example, His name is Madhusﬂdana
because He killed the demon of the name Madhu; His name is Govinda
because He gives pleasure to the cows and to the senses; His name is Vasudeva
because He appeared as the son of Vasudeva; His name is Devaki-nandana
because He accepted Devaki as His mother; His name is Yas’oda-nandana
because He awarded His childhood pastimes to Yas’oda at Vrndavana; His
name is Partha-sarathi because He worked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna.
Similarly, His name is Hrsikes’a because He gave direction to Arjuna on the
Battlefield of Kuruksetra.

Arjuna is referred to as Dhanaﬁjaya in this verse because he helped his
elder brother in fetching wealth when it was required by the king to make
expenditures for different sacrifices. Similarly, Bhima is known as Vrkodara
because he could eat as voraciously as he could perform herculean tasks, such
as killing the demon Hidimba. So the particular types of conchshell blown by
the different personalities on the side of the Pandavas, beginning with the
Lord’s, were all very encouraging to the fighting soldiers. On the other side
there were no such credits, nor the presence of Lord Krsna, the supreme
director, nor that of the goddess of fortune. So they were predestined to lose
the battle—and that was the message announced by the sounds of the
conchshells.

TEXTS 16—18

ma W: Mama»
W ﬂaw mm: H 9&9 ||

mamgmzml



Eﬁiﬁﬂ name: w: gww II F H

anantavijayam rc‘rjci
kunti—putro yudhisthirah
nakulah sahadevas’ ca
sughosa-manipuspakau

kds’yas’ ca paramesv—c‘tsah

s’ikhandi ca mahc‘I—rathah

dhrstadyumno viratas’ ca
scityakis’ cciparcijitah

drupado draupadeyas’ ca
sarvas’ah prthivi-pate
saubhadras’ ca mahc‘I-bahuh

s’ar’tkhc‘m dadhmuh prthak prthak

SYNONYMS

ananta—vijayam—the conch named Ananta-Vijaya; rc‘tjc‘r—the king;
kunti—putrah—the son of Kunti; yudhisthirah—Yudhisthira; nakulah—Nakula;
sahadevah—Sahadeva; ca—and; sughosa-manipuspakau—the conches named
Sughosa and Manipuspaka; kas’yah—the King of Kas’i (Varanasi); ca—and;
parama—isu-asah—the great archer; s’ikhandi—Sikhandi; ca—also;
mahc‘t-Tathah—one who can fight alone against thousands;
dhrstadyumnah—Dhrstadyumna (the son of King Drupada); virdtah—Virata
(the prince who gave shelter to the Pandavas while they were in disguise);
ca—also; scityakih—Satyaki (the same as Yuyudhana, the charioteer of Lord
Krsna); ca—and; aparc'tjitah—who had never been vanquished;
drupadah—Drupada, the King of Paﬁcala; draupadeyah—the sons of Draupadi;
ca—also; sarvas’ah—all; prthivi-pate—O King; saubhadrah—Abhimanyu, the
son of Subhadra; ca—also; mahc‘t-bc‘thuh—mighty-armed;
s’ar’tkhc‘m—conchshells; dadhmuh—blew; prthak prthak—each separately.



TRANSLATION

King Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew his conchshell, the Ananta-Vijaya,
and Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosa and Manipuspaka. That great
archer the King of Kas’i, the great fighter Sikhandi, Dhrstadyumna, Virata, the
unconquerable Satyaki, Drupada, the sons of Draupadi, and the others, 0 King,
such as the mighty-armed son of Subhadra, all blew their respective conchshells.

PURPORT

Saﬁjaya informed King Dhrtarastra very tactfully that his unwise policy of
deceiving the sons of Pandu and endeavoring to enthrone his own sons on the
seat of the kingdom was not very laudable. The signs already clearly indicated
that the whole Kuru dynasty would be killed in that great battle. Beginning
with the grandsire, Bhisma, down to the grandsons like Abhimanyu and
others—including kings from many states of the world—all were present
there, and all were doomed. The whole catastrophe was due to King
Dhrtarastra, because he encouraged the policy followed by his sons.

TEXT 19

HWWWWI
maﬁa‘iﬁagaﬁswmu 92 ||

sa ghoso dhartardstranam
hrdayc‘mi vyadarayat

nabhas’ ca prthivim caiva

tumulo ’bhyanunadayan

SYNONYMS

sah—that; ghosah—Vibration; dhartarastranam—of the sons of Dhrtarastra;
hrdayc‘mi—hearts; vyadarayat—shattered; nabhah—the sky; ca—also;



prthivim—the surface of the earth; ca—also; eva—certainly;
tumulah—uproarious; abhyanum‘tdayan—resounding.

TRANSLATION

The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious. Vibrating
both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts of the sons of
Dhrtarastra.

PURPORT

When Bhisma and the others on the side of Duryodhana blew their
respective conchshells, there was no heart-breaking on the part of the
Pandavas. Such occurrences are not mentioned, but in this particular verse it
is mentioned that the hearts of the sons of Dhrtarastra were shattered by the
sounds vibrated by the Pandavas’ party. This is due to the Pandavas and their
confidence in Lord Krsna. One who takes shelter of the Supreme Lord has
nothing to fear, even in the midst of the greatest calamity.

TEXT 20

aammmﬁwzl
WWWWH
WWWWIIQN

atha vyavasthitc‘m drstvc‘r
dhartarastrc‘m kapi-dhvajah
pravrtte s’astra—sampc‘tte
dhcmm udyamya pandavah
hrsikes’am tada vcikyam
idam aha mahi—pate

SYNONYMS



atha—thereupon; vyavasthitan—situated; drstvc‘r—looking upon;
dhartarastran—the sons of Dhrtarastra; kapi—dhvajah—he whose flag was
marked with Hanuman; pravrtte—while about to engage; s’astra—sampc‘tte—in
releasing his arrows; dhcmuh—bow; udyamya—taking up; pandavah—the son
of Pandu (Arjuna); hrsikes’am—unto Lord Krsna; tadc't—at that time;
vcikyam—words; idam—these; aha—said; mahi—pate—O King.

TRANSLATION

At that time Arjuna, the son of Pandu, seated in the chariot bearing the flag
marked With Hanuman, took up his bow and prepared to shoot his arrows. 0
King, after looking at the sons of Dhrtarastra drawn in military array, Arjuna
then spoke to Lord Krsna these words.

PURPORT

The battle was just about to begin. It is understood from the above
statement that the sons of Dhrtarastra were more or less disheartened by the
unexpected arrangement of military force by the Pandavas, who were guided
by the direct instructions of Lord Krsna on the battlefield. The emblem of
Hanuman on the flag of Arjuna is another sign of Victory because Hanuman
cooperated with Lord Rama in the battle between Rama and Ravana, and Lord
Rama emerged Victorious. Now both Rama and Hanuman were present on the
chariot of Arjuna to help him. Lord Krsna is Rama Himself, and wherever
Lord Rama is, His eternal servitor Hanuman and His eternal consort Sita, the
goddess of fortune, are present. Therefore, Arjuna had no cause to fear any
enemies whatsoever. And above all, the Lord of the senses, Lord Krsna, was
personally present to give him direction. Thus, all good counsel was available
to Arjuna in the matter of executing the battle. In such auspicious conditions,
arranged by the Lord for His eternal devotee, lay the signs of assured Victory.

TEXTS 21—22

@331?



Wzdwﬁseam

wmﬁmﬁlﬁéisa‘ WWW" Q? H
W FIE W H Q32 ||

arjuna uvc‘rca
senayor ubhayor madhye
ratham sthcipaya me ’cyuta
yc‘wad etc‘m nirikse ’ham
yoddhu—kaman avasthitc‘m
kair mayci saha yoddhavyam
asmm rana—samudyame

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘Ica—Arjuna said; senayoh—of the armies; ubhayoh—both;
madhye—between; ratham—the chariot; sthc‘tpaya—please keep; me—my;
acyuta—O infallible one; yc‘wat—as long as; etc‘m—all these; nirikse—may look
upon; aham—I; yoddhu-kaman—desiring to fight; avasthitc‘m—arrayed on the
battlefield; kaih—with whom; maya—by me; saha—together;
yoddhavyam—have to fight; asmin—in this; rana—strife; samudyame—in the
attempt.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies
so that I may see those present here, Who desire to fight, and With Whom I must
contend in this great trial of arms.

PURPORT

Although Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of His
causeless mercy He was engaged in the service of His friend. He never fails in
His affection for His devotees, and thus He is addressed herein as infallible. As
charioteer, He had to carry out the orders of Arjuna, and since He did not



hesitate to do so, He is addressed as infallible. Although He had accepted the
position of a charioteer for His devotee, His supreme position was not
challenged. In all circumstances, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Hrsikes’a, the Lord of the total senses. The relationship between the Lord and
His servitor is very sweet and transcendental. The servitor is always ready to
render service to the Lord, and, similarly, the Lord is always seeking an
opportunity to render some service to the devotee. He takes greater pleasure in
His pure devotee’s assuming the advantageous position of ordering Him than
He does in being the giver of orders. Since He is master, everyone is under His
orders, and no one is above Him to order Him. But when He finds that a pure
devotee is ordering Him, He obtains transcendental pleasure, although He is
the infallible master of all circumstances.

As a pure devotee of the Lord, Arjuna had no desire to fight with his
cousins and brothers, but he was forced to come onto the battlefield by the
obstinacy of Duryodhana, who was never agreeable to any peaceful
negotiation. Therefore, he was very anxious to see who the leading persons
present on the battlefield were. Although there was no question of a
peacemaking endeavor on the battlefield, he wanted to see them again, and to
see how much they were bent upon demanding an unwanted war.

TEXT 23

was: a E383 WET: I
W W WW: II 23 ||

yotsyamam‘m avekse ’ham
ya ete ’tra samagatc‘th
dhartarastrasya dmbuddher
yuddhe priya—cikirsavah

SYNONYMS

yotsyamc‘man—those who will be fighting; avekse—let me see; aham—I;



ye—who; ete—those; atra—here; samagatah—assembled; dhartarastrasya—for
the son of Dhrtarastra; dmbuddheh—evil-minded; yuddhe—in the fight;
priya—well; cikirsavah—wishing.

TRANSLATION

Let me see those Who have come here to fight, Wishing to please the
eVil-minded son of Dhrtarastra.

PURPORT

It was an open secret that Duryodhana wanted to usurp the kingdom of the
Pandavas by evil plans, in collaboration with his father, Dhrtarastra.
Therefore, all persons who had joined the side of Duryodhana must have been
birds of the same feather. Arjuna wanted to see them on the battlefield before
the fight was begun, just to learn who they were, but he had no intention of
proposing peace negotiations with them. It was also a fact that he wanted to
see them to make an estimate of the strength which he had to face, although
he was quite confident of Victory because Krsna was sitting by his side.

TEXT 24

W331?

WWWWI
WWIWIIwII

saﬁjaya uvc‘rca
evam ukto hrsikes’o
guddkes’ena bhc‘wata
senayor ubhayor madhye
sthc‘tpayiwci rathottamam

SYNONYMS



saﬂjayah uvc‘tca—Saﬁjaya said; evam—thus; uktah—addressed; hrsikes’ah—Lord
Krsna; gudakes’ena—by Arjuna; bhc‘wata—O descendant of Bharata;
senayoh—of the armies; ubhayoh—both; madhye—in the midst;
sthcipayiwd—placing; ratha—uttamam—the finest chariot.

TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, having thus been addressed by
Arjuna, Lord Krsna drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both
parties.

PURPORT

In this verse Arjuna is referred to as Gudakes’a. Gudaka means sleep, and
one who conquers sleep is called gudakes’a. Sleep also means ignorance. 80
Arjuna conquered both sleep and ignorance because of his friendship with
Krsna. As a great devotee of Krsna, he could not forget Krsna even for a
moment, because that is the nature of a devotee. Either in waking or in sleep, a
devotee of the Lord can never be free from thinking of Krsna’s name, form,
qualities and pastimes. Thus a devotee of Krsna can conquer both sleep and
ignorance simply by thinking of Krsna constantly. This is called Krsna
consciousness, or samadhi. As Hrsikes’a, or the director of the senses and mind
of every living entity, Krsna could understand Arjuna’s purpose in placing the
chariot in the midst of the armies. Thus He did so, and spoke as follows.

TEXT 25

aﬁmﬁvmﬁlaamﬁqiana‘ifaaﬁI
mméwﬁamﬁwﬁﬁruqau

bhisma-drona—pramukhatah
sarvesc‘rm ca mahi—ksitam
uvc‘rca pc‘mha pas’yaitc‘m
samavetc‘m kumn iti



SYNONYMS

bhisma—Grandfather Bhisma; drona—the teacher Drona; pramukhatah—in
front of; sarvesc‘tm—all; ca—also; mahi—ksitam—chiefs of the world;

uvc‘Ica—said; pc‘mha—O son of Prtha; pas’ya—just behold; etc‘m—all of them;
samavetc‘m—assembled; kumn—the members of the Kuru dynasty; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

In the presence of Bhisma, Drona and all the other Chieftains of the world,

the Lord said, Just behold, Partha, all the Kurus assembled here.

PURPORT

As the Supersoul of all living entities, Lord Krsna could understand what
was going on in the mind of Arjuna. The use of the word Hrsikes’a in this
connection indicates that He knew everything. And the word Partha, or the
son of Kunti, or Prtha, is also similarly significant in reference to Arjuna. As a
friend, He wanted to inform Arjuna that because Arjuna was the son of Prtha,
the sister of His own father Vasudeva, He had agreed to be the charioteer of
Arjuna. Now what did Krsna mean when He told Arjuna to “behold the
Kurus”? Did Arjuna want to stop there and not fight? Krsna never expected
such things from the son of His aunt Prtha. The mind of Arjuna was thus
predicted by the Lord in friendly joking.

TEXT 26

Wat: fﬁQﬁé’J WI
?JTI
awﬂa WW II as H

tatrc‘tpas’yat sthitc‘m pc‘mhah
pitfn atha pitamahan



acc‘wyc‘m mcitulc‘m bhrcitfn
putrc‘m pautrc‘m sakhims tathd
s’vas’mc‘m suhrdas’ caiva
senayor ubhayor api

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; apas’yat—he could see; sthitc‘m—standing; pc‘mhah—Arjuna;
pitTn—fathers; atha—also; pitamahan—grandfathers; acaryc‘m—teachers;
mcitulc‘m—maternal uncles; bhratTn—brothers; putrc‘m—sons;
pautrc‘m—grandsons; sakhin—friends; tathc‘I—too; s’vas’mc‘m—fathers-in-law;
suhrdah—well-wishers; ca—also; eva—certainly; senayoh—of the armies;
ubhayoh—of both parties; api—including.

TRANSLATION

There Arjuna could see, Within the midst of the armies of both parties, his
fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons,
friends, and also his fathers-in-law and well-Wishers.

PURPORT

On the battlefield Arjuna could see all kinds of relatives. He could see
persons like Bhﬂrisrava, who were his father’s contemporaries, grandfathers
Bhisma and Somadatta, teachers like Dronacarya and Krpacarya, maternal
uncles like Salya and Sakuni, brothers like Duryodhana, sons like Laksmana,
friends like As’vatthama, well-wishers like Krtavarma, etc. He could see also
the armies which contained many of his friends.

TEXT 27

WHEﬁﬁWHair—omﬁaﬁmﬁl
WWW" N H



tc‘m samiksya sa kaunteyah
sarvc‘m bandhﬁn avasthitc‘m
krpayci paraycivisto
visidcmn idam abravit

SYNONYMS

tc‘m—all of them; samiksya—after seeing; sah—he; kaunteyah—the son of
Kunti; sarvc‘m—all kinds of; bandhﬁn—relatives; avasthitan—situated;
krpayci—by compassion; parayci—of a high grade; avistah—overwhelmed;
visidcm—while lamenting; idam—thus; abravit—spoke.

TRANSLATION

When the son of Kunti, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and
relatives, he became overwhelmed With compassion and spoke thus.

TEXT 28

@ﬁWWEﬁHﬁ'ﬁ-ﬂﬁﬁl
aiaﬁrmwﬁrﬁaaqﬁﬁwﬁuwu

arjuna uvc‘rca
drstvemam sva-janam krsna
yuyutsum samupasthitam
sidcmti mama gc‘ttrc‘mi
mukham ca paris’usyati

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘Ica—Arjuna said; drstvc‘t—after seeing; imam—all these;
sva-janam—kinsmen; krsna—O Krsna; yuyutsum—all in a fighting spirit;
samupasthitam—present; sidcmti—are quivering; mama—my; gc‘rtrc‘mi—limbs



of the body; mukham—mouth; ca—also; paris’usyati—is drying up.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: My dear Krsna, seeing my friends and relatives present before
me in such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my
mouth drying up.

PURPORT

Any man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities
which are found in godly persons or in the demigods, whereas the nondevotee,
however advanced he may be in material qualifications by education and
culture, lacks in godly qualities. As such, Arjuna, just after seeing his kinsmen,
friends and relatives on the battlefield, was at once overwhelmed by
compassion for them who had so decided to fight amongst themselves. As far as
his soldiers were concerned, he was sympathetic from the beginning, but he
felt compassion even for the soldiers of the opposite party, foreseeing their
imminent death. And while he was so thinking, the limbs of his body began to
quiver, and his mouth became dry. He was more or less astonished to see their
fighting spirit. Practically the whole community, all blood relatives of Arjuna,
had come to fight with him. This overwhelmed a kind devotee like Arjuna.
Although it is not mentioned here, still one can easily imagine that not only
were Arjuna’s bodily limbs quivering and his mouth drying up, but he was also
crying out of compassion. Such symptoms in Arjuna were not due to weakness
but to his softheartedness, a characteristic of a pure devotee of the Lord. It is
said therefore:

yasyc‘rsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiﬁccmci

sarvair gunais tatra samasate smith

harc‘w abhaktasya kuto mahad—guna
mano—rathemisati dhc‘wato bahih

“One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has all
the good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee of the Lord



has only material qualifications that are of little value. This is because he is
hovering on the mental plane and is certain to be attracted by the glaring
material energy.” (Bbég. 5.18.12)

TEXT 29

éiwaaﬁﬁﬁnaﬁaamﬁl
Wahﬁmaﬁaqﬁaaﬁuqsu

vepathus’ ca s’arire me

roma-harsas’ ca jayate
gc‘mdivam sramsate hastat

tvak caiva paridahyate

SYNONYMS

vepathuh—trembling of the body; ca—also; s’arire—on the body; me—my;
roma—harsah—standing of hair on end; ca—also; jayate—is taking place;
gc‘mdivam—the bow of Arjuna; sramsate—is slipping; hastat—from the hand;
tvak—skin; ca—also; eva—certainly; paridahyate—is burning.

TRANSLATION

My Whole body is trembling, my hair is standing on end, my bow Gandiva is
slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning.

PURPORT

There are two kinds of trembling of the body, and two kinds of standings of
the hair on end. Such phenomena occur either in great spiritual ecstasy or out
of great fear under material conditions. There is no fear in transcendental
realization. Arjuna’s symptoms in this situation are out of material
fear—namely, loss of life. This is evident from other symptoms also; he became
so impatient that his famous bow Gandiva was slipping from his hands, and,



because his heart was burning within him, he was feeling a burning sensation
of the skin. All these are due to a material conception of life.

TEXT 30

Hammaﬁmzl
ﬁmﬁawﬁﬁqﬁarﬁhauaou

71a ca s’aknomy avasthc‘rtum
bhramativa ca me manah
nimittc‘mi ca pas’yc‘rmi
viparitc‘mi kes’ava

SYNONYMS

na—nor; ca—also; s’aknomi—am I able; avasthc‘ttum—to stay;
bhramati—forgetting; iva—as; ca—and; me—my; manah—mind;
nimittani—causes; ca—also; pas’yc‘Imi—I see; viparitc‘mi—just the opposite;
kes’aUa—O killer of the demon Kes’i (Krsna).

TRANSLATION

I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and my
mind is reeling. I see only causes of misfortune, O Krsna, killer of the Kes’i
demon.

PURPORT

Due to his impatience, Arjuna was unable to stay on the battlefield, and he
was forgetting himself on account of this weakness of his mind. Excessive
attachment for material things puts a man in such a bewildering condition of
existence. Bhayam dvitiyc‘tbhinives’atah sycit (Bbég. 11.2.37): such fearfulness and
loss of mental equilibrium take place in persons who are too affected by
material conditions. Arjuna envisioned only painful reverses in the



battlefield—he would not be happy even by gaining Victory over the foe. The
words nimittc‘mi viparitc'mi are significant. When a man sees only frustration in
his expectations, he thinks, “Why am I here?” Everyone is interested in himself
and his own welfare. No one is interested in the Supreme Self. Arjuna is
showing ignorance of his real self-interest by Krsna’s will. One’s real
self-interest lies in Visnu, or Krsna. The conditioned soul forgets this, and
therefore suffers material pains. Arjuna thought that his Victory in the battle
would only be a cause of lamentation for him.

TEXT 31

aaaﬁsmrﬁmWI
ﬁmﬁaﬁwﬁamwﬁauseu

71a ca s’reyo ’nupas’ycimi

hawa sva—jcmam ahave
71a kfmkse Vijayam krsna
71a ca rc‘rjyam sukhc‘mi ca

SYNONYMS

na—nor; ca—also; s’reyah—good; anupas’yami—do I foresee; hatvci—by killing;
sva—janam—own kinsmen; ahave—in the fight; na—nor; kankse—do I desire;
vijayam—Victory; krsna—O Krsna; na—nor; ca—also; rc‘tjyam—kingdom;
sukhc‘mi—happiness thereof; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this
battle, nor can I, my dear Krsna, desire any subsequent Victory, kingdom, or
happiness.

PURPORT



Without knowing that one’s self-interest is in Visnu (or Krsna),
conditioned souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to be happy in
such situations. In such a blind conception of life, they forget even the causes
of material happiness. Arjuna appears to have even forgotten the moral codes
for a ksam'ya. It is said that two kinds of men, namely the ksatriya who dies
directly in front of the battlefield under Krsna’s personal orders and the
person in the renounced order of life who is absolutely devoted to spiritual
culture, are eligible to enter into the sun globe, which is so powerful and
dazzling. Arjuna is reluctant even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He
thinks that by killing his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life, and
therefore he is not willing to fight, just as a person who does not feel hunger is
not inclined to cook. He has now decided to go into the forest and live a
secluded life in frustration. But as a ksati'iya, he requires a kingdom for his
subsistence, because the ksati'iyas cannot engage themselves in any other
occupation. But Arjuna has no kingdom. Arjuna’s sole opportunity for gaining
a kingdom lies in fighting with his cousins and brothers and reclaiming the
kingdom inherited from his father, which he does not like to do. Therefore he
considers himself fit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.

TEXTS 32—35

ﬁataﬁﬁuﬁﬁ—‘dﬁkiﬁa‘fﬁﬁﬁm
Wﬁmfaea‘rmiﬁwwﬁausqu

asﬁsaﬁamaﬁwmwﬁal
311W: ﬁat: wﬁaaﬁmz || 33 ||
mam: age: ﬂan: 5am: Wail
mﬁﬁwﬁwﬁﬁwuasu
aﬁéaﬁmméﬁizﬁagna‘iﬁI
WW:$I§I‘1&I:F€II§FII€=III 32 ||

kim no rc‘tjyena govinda



kim bhogair jivitena vc‘I
yesc‘rm arthe kanksitam no
rc‘rjyam bhogc‘rh sukhc‘mi ca

ta ime ’vasthitc‘r yuddhe
pranams tyakwa dhcmc‘mi ca

acc‘wycih pitarah putrc‘rs

tathaiva ca pitc‘rmahc‘th

mcitulc‘th s’vas’mah pautrc‘rh

s’yc‘tlc‘rh sambandhinas tathd
etc‘m 71a hantum icchc‘rmi
ghnato ’pi madhusﬁdana

api trailokya—rajyasya
hetoh kim nu mahi—krte
nihatya dhartarastran nah
kc‘I pritih syc‘rj jamirdana

SYNONYMS

kim—what use; nah—to us; rc‘tjyena—is the kingdom; govinda—O Krsna;
kim—what; bhogaih—enjoyment; jivitena—living; Ua—either; yesc‘tm—of
whom; arthe—for the sake; kanksitam—is desired; nah—by us;
Tajyam—kingdom; bhogc‘th—material enjoyment; sukhc‘mi—all happiness;
ca—also; te—all of them; ime—these; avasthitcih—situated; yuddhe—on this
battlefield; prc‘mc‘m—lives; tyakwd—giving up; dhanc‘mi—riches; ca—also;
acaryc‘th—teachers; pitarah—fathers; putrc‘th—sons; tathc‘I—as well as;
eva—certainly; ca—also; pitc‘tmahc‘th—grandfathers; mcitulc'th—maternal
uncles; s’vas’mc‘th—fathers-in-law; pautrc‘th—grandsons;
s’yc‘Ilah—brothers-in-law; sambandhinah—relatives; tathc‘I—as well as; etc‘m—all
these; na—never; hantum—to kill; icchc‘rmi—do I wish; ghnatah—being killed;
api—even; madhusﬁdana—O killer of the demon Madhu (Krsna); api—even
if; trai—lokya—of the three worlds; rc‘rjyasya—for the kingdom; hetoh—in
exchange; kim nu—what to speak of; mahi-krte—for the sake of the earth;



nihatya—by killing; dhartarastran—the sons of Dhrtarastra; nah—our;
ka—what; pritih—pleasure; sydt—will there be; janardana—O maintainer of
all living entities.

TRANSLATION

O Govinda, of What avail to us are a kingdom, happiness or even life itself
When all those for Whom we may desire them are now arrayed on this
battlefield? 0 Madhusﬁdana, When teachers, fathers, sons, grandfathers,
maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other relatives
are ready to give up their lives and properties and are standing before me, Why
should I Wish to kill them, even though they might otherwise kill me? O
maintainer of all living entities, I am not prepared to fight With them even in
exchange for the three worlds, let alone this earth. What pleasure Will we derive
from killing the sons of Dhrtarastra?

PURPORT

Arjuna has addressed Lord Krsna as Govinda because Krsna is the object of
all pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significant word, Arjuna
indicates that Krsna should understand what will satisfy Arjuna’s senses. But
Govinda is not meant for satisfying our senses. If we try to satisfy the senses of
Govinda, however, then automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially,
everyone wants to satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the order supplier
for such satisfaction. The Lord will satisfy the senses of the living entities as
much as they deserve, but not to the extent that they may covet. But when one
takes the opposite way—namely, when one tries to satisfy the senses of
Govinda without desiring to satisfy one’s own senses—then by the grace of
Govinda all desires of the living entity are satisfied. Arjuna’s deep affection
for community and family members is exhibited here partly due to his natural
compassion for them. He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to
show his opulence to friends and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all his
relatives and friends will be killed on the battlefield and he will be unable to
share his opulence after Victory. This is a typical calculation of material life.



The transcendental life, however, is different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy
the desires of the Lord, he can, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for
the service of the Lord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a
farthing. Arjuna did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any need
to kill them, he desired that Krsna kill them personally. At this point he did
not know that Krsna had already killed them before their coming into the
battlefield and that he was only to become an instrument for Krsna. This fact
is disclosed in following chapters. As a natural devotee of the Lord, Arjuna did
not like to retaliate against his miscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the
Lord’s plan that they should all be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not
retaliate against the wrongdoer, but the Lord does not tolerate any mischief
done to the devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on His
own account, but He excuses no one who has done harm to His devotees.
Therefore the Lord was determined to kill the miscreants, although Arjuna
wanted to excuse them.

TEXT 36

WWM
Haﬁeiaﬁsﬁﬂﬁtwmam

Wiﬁwisc—onqﬁﬁzamwusau

papam evc‘rs’rayed asmc‘m
hawaitc‘m citatciymah
tasmc‘m nc‘whc‘r vayam hantum
dhartarastran sa—bc‘mdhavan
sva-janam hi katham hawa
sukhinah syc‘rma madhava

SYNONYMS

papam—Vices; eva—certainly; cis’rayet—must come upon; asmc‘m—us;
hatvci—by killing; etc‘m—all these; citatciymah—aggressors; tasmc‘It—therefore;



na—never; arhc‘th—deserving; vayam—we; hantum—to kill;
dhartarastran—the sons of Dhrtarastra; sa—bc‘mdhavan—along with friends;
sva-janam—kinsmen; hi—certainly; katham—how; hawc‘I—by killing;
sukhmah—happy; sydma—will we become; madhaUa—O Krsna, husband of
the goddess of fortune.

TRANSLATION

Sin Will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not proper for
us to kill the sons of Dhrtarastra and our friends. What should we gain, 0
Krsna, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how could we be happy by killing
our own kinsmen?

PURPORT

According to Vedic injunctions there are six kinds of aggressors: (1) a
poison giver, (2) one who sets fire to the house, (3) one who attacks with
deadly weapons, (4) one who plunders riches, (5) one who occupies another’s
land, and (6) one who kidnaps a wife. Such aggressors are at once to be killed,
and no sin is incurred by killing such aggressors. Such killing of aggressors is
quite befitting any ordinary man, but Arjuna was not an ordinary person. He
was saintly by character, and therefore he wanted to deal with them in
saintliness. This kind of saintliness, however, is not for a ksati‘iya. Although a
responsible man in the administration of a state is required to be saintly, he
should not be cowardly. For example, Lord Rama was so saintly that people
even now are anxious to live in the kingdom of Lord Rama (Tama-Tajya), but
Lord Rama never showed any cowardice. Ravana was an aggressor against
Rama because Ravana kidnapped Rama’s wife, Sita, but Lord Rama gave him
sufficient lessons, unparalleled in the history of the world. In Arjuna’s case,
however, one should consider the special type of aggressors, namely his own
grandfather, own teacher, friends, sons, grandsons, etc. Because of them,
Arjuna thought that he should not take the severe steps necessary against
ordinary aggressors. Besides that, saintly persons are advised to forgive. Such
injunctions for saintly persons are more important than any political



emergency. Arjuna considered that rather than kill his own kinsmen for
political reasons, it would be better to forgive them on grounds of religion and
saintly behavior. He did not, therefore, consider such killing profitable simply
for the matter of temporary bodily happiness. After all, kingdoms and
pleasures derived therefrom are not permanent, so why should he risk his life
and eternal salvation by killing his own kinsmen? Arjuna’s addressing of Krsna
as “Madhava,” or the husband of the goddess of fortune, is also significant in
this connection. He wanted to point out to Krsna that, as husband of the
goddess of fortune, He should not induce Arjuna to take up a matter which
would ultimately bring about misfortune. Krsna, however, never brings
misfortune to anyone, to say nothing of His devotees.

TEXTS 37—38

Wﬁmmn

wwaﬁﬁaﬁﬁawuseu
Waitamfﬁrzwmﬁlaﬁiqw
wmﬁaﬁmﬁﬁhﬁﬁuaw

yady apy ete 71a pas’yanti
lobhopahata—cetasah

kula—ksaya—krtam dosam

mitra—drohe ca pcitakam

katham 71a jﬁeyam asmc‘rbhih
papad asmc‘m nivartitum
kula—ksaya—krtam dosam
prapas’yadbhir janc‘wdana

SYNONYMS

yadi—if; api—even; ete—they; na—do not; pas’yanti—see; lobha—by greed;
upahata—overpowered; cetasah—their hearts; kula-ksaya—in killing the
family; krtam—done; dosam—fault; mitra—drohe—in quarreling with friends;



ca—also; pcitakam—sinful reactions; katham—why; na—should not;
jﬁeyam—be known; asmdbhih—by us; papat—from sins; asmc‘It—these;
nivartitum—to cease; kula-ksaya—in the destruction of a dynasty;
krtam—done; dosam—crime; prapas’yadbhih—by those who can see;
jcmc‘wdana—O Krsna.

TRANSLATION

O Janardana, although these men, their hearts overtaken by greed, see no
fault in killing one’s family or quarreling With friends, Why should we, Who can
see the crime in destroying a family, engage in these acts of sin?

PURPORT

A ksati'iya is not supposed to refuse to battle or gamble when he is so
invited by some rival party. Under such an obligation, Arjuna could not refuse
to fight, because he had been challenged by the party of Duryodhana. In this
connection, Arjuna considered that the other party might be blind to the
effects of such a challenge. Arjuna, however, could see the evil consequences
and could not accept the challenge. Obligation is actually binding when the
effect is good, but when the effect is otherwise, then no one can be bound.
Considering all these pros and cons, Arjuna decided not to fight.

TEXT 39

waﬁmﬁawnizmmzl
uﬁﬁéw'wuﬁisﬁmaeleussu

kula—ksaye pranas’yanti
kula—dharmah sanc‘Itam‘Ih
dharme haste kulam krtsnam
adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta



SYNONYMS

kula—ksaye—in destroying the family; pranas’yanti—become vanquished;
kula-dharmah—the family traditions; sandtam‘th—eternal; dharme—religion;
naste—being destroyed; kulam—family; krtsnam—whole;
adharmah—irreligion; abhibhavati—transforms; uta—it is said.

TRANSLATION

With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is vanquished,
and thus the rest of the family becomes involved in irreligion.

PURPORT

In the system of the vamas’mma institution there are many principles of
religious traditions to help members of the family grow properly and attain
spiritual values. The elder members are responsible for such purifying processes
in the family, beginning from birth to death. But on the death of the elder
members, such family traditions of purification may stop, and the remaining
younger family members may develop irreligious habits and thereby lose their
chance for spiritual salvation. Therefore, for no purpose should the elder
members of the family be slain.

TEXT 40

WWW”
aiggmaiﬁaamﬁaviaeezueou

adharmc‘tbhibhavc‘rt krsna

pradusyanti kula—striyah
strisu dustc‘rsu vc‘wsneya
jayate vama—sankarah



SYNONYMS

adharma—irreligion; abhibhavc‘rt—having become predominant; krsna—O
Krsna; pradusyanti—become polluted; kula—striyah—family ladies; strisu—by
the womanhood; dustc‘rsu—being so polluted; vc‘wsneya—O descendant of
Vrsni; jdyate—comes into being; vama—sankarah—unwanted progeny.

TRANSLATION

When irreligion is prominent in the family, 0 Krsna, the women of the
family become polluted, and from the degradation of womanhood, O descendant
of Vrsni, comes unwanted progeny.

PURPORT

Good population in human society is the basic principle for peace,
prosperity and spiritual progress in life. The vamas’mma religion’s principles
were so designed that the good population would prevail in society for the
general spiritual progress of state and community. Such population depends on
the chastity and faithfulness of its womanhood. As children are very prone to
be misled, women are similarly very prone to degradation. Therefore, both
children and women require protection by the elder members of the family. By
being engaged in various religious practices, women will not be misled into
adultery. According to Canakya Pandita, women are generally not very
intelligent and therefore not trustworthy. So the different family traditions of
religious activities should always engage them, and thus their chastity and
devotion will give birth to a good population eligible for participating in the
vamc‘rs’rama system. On the failure of such vamc‘ts’rama—dharma, naturally the
women become free to act and mix with men, and thus adultery is indulged in
at the risk of unwanted population. Irresponsible men also provoke adultery in
society, and thus unwanted children flood the human race at the risk of war
and pestilence.



TEXT 41

WWWWHI
wﬁrﬁaﬁﬁﬁigﬁﬁvﬁwﬁmzumu

sankaro narakciyaiva
kula—ghm‘rm‘rm kulasya ca
patcmti pitaro hy esc‘m’t

lupta—pindodaka-kriyah

SYNONYMS

sankarah—such unwanted children; narakciya—make for hellish life;
eva—certainly; kula-ghm‘mc‘tm—for those who are killers of the family;
kulasya—for the family; ca—also; patcmti—fall down; pitarah—forefathers;
hi—certainly; esc'Im—of them; lupta—stopped; pinda—of offerings of food;
udaka—and water; kriyc‘th—performances.

TRANSLATION

An increase of unwanted population certainly causes hellish life both for the
family and for those Who destroy the family tradition. The ancestors of such
corrupt families fall down, because the performances for offering them food and
water are entirely stopped.

PURPORT

According to the rules and regulations of fruitive activities, there is a need
to offer periodical food and water to the forefathers of the family. This
offering is performed by worship of Visnu, because eating the remnants of food
offered to Visnu can deliver one from all kinds of sinful actions. Sometimes
the forefathers may be suffering from various types of sinful reactions, and
sometimes some of them cannot even acquire a gross material body and are
forced to remain in subtle bodies as ghosts. Thus, when remnants of prasc‘tdam



food are offered to forefathers by descendants, the forefathers are released
from ghostly or other kinds of miserable life. Such help rendered to forefathers
is a family tradition, and those who are not in devotional life are required to
perform such rituals. One who is engaged in the devotional life is not required
to perform such actions. Simply by performing devotional service, one can
deliver hundreds and thousands of forefathers from all kinds of misery. It is

stated in the Bhagavatam (11.5.41):

devarsi—bhﬁtdpta—nmam pitfnam
71a kinkaro nciyam mi ca rc‘tjcm
sarvc‘ttmana yah s’aranam s’aranyam
gato mukundam parihrtya kartam

“Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver of
liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to the path in all
seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to the demigods, sages, general
living entities, family members, humankind or forefathers.” Such obligations
are automatically fulfilled by performance of devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 42

szmaﬁamn
W arﬁraniz War eras": || 8? ||

dosair etaih kula—ghnanam
vama—sankara—karakaih
utsc‘tdyante jati—dharmah
kula—dharmas’ ca s’c‘rs’vatcih

SYNONYMS

dosaih—by such faults; etaih—all these; kula—ghm‘mam—of the destroyers of
the family; vama—sankara—of unwanted children; karakaih—which are
causes; utsc‘tdycmte—are devastated; jati-dharmah—community projects;



kula—dharmah—family traditions; ca—also; s’c‘ts’vatcih—eternal.

TRANSLATION

By the evil deeds of those Who destroy the family tradition and thus give rise
to unwanted children, all kinds of community projects and family welfare
activities are devastated.

PURPORT

Community projects for the four orders of human society, combined with
family welfare activities, as they are set forth by the institution of
sanc‘Itana-dharma, or vamc‘ts’rama—dharma, are designed to enable the human
being to attain his ultimate salvation. Therefore, the breaking of the
sandtana-dharma tradition by irresponsible leaders of society brings about
chaos in that society, and consequently people forget the aim of life—Visnu.
Such leaders are called blind, and persons who follow such leaders are sure to
be led into chaos.

TEXT 43
WWWWI
Wheeam‘rnazﬁaﬂﬁgquasu

utsanna—kula—dharmanam
manusyanam jamirdana
narake niyatam vc‘rso
bhavatity anus’us’mma

SYNONYMS

utscmna—spoiled; kula—dharmanam—of those who have the family traditions;
manusyanam—of such men; janardana—O Krsna; narake—in hell;
niyatam—always; vc‘tsah—residence; bhavati—it so becomes; iti—thus;



anus’us’ruma—I have heard by disciplic succession.

TRANSLATION

O Krsna, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession that
those Who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.

PURPORT

Arjuna bases his argument not on his own personal experience, but on what
he has heard from the authorities. That is the way of receiving real knowledge.
One cannot reach the real point of factual knowledge without being helped by
the right person who is already established in that knowledge. There is a
system in the vamas’mma institution by which before death one has to undergo
the process of atonement for his sinful activities. One who is always engaged in
sinful activities must utilize the process of atonement called the prc‘tyas’citta.
Without doing so, one surely will be transferred to hellish planets to undergo
miserable lives as the result of sinful activities.

TEXT 44

Wmmﬁmﬁmml
Wﬁmnwau

aho bata mahat papam
kartum vyavasitc‘t vayam
yad rcijya—sukha—lobhena
hantum sva-jcmam udyatc‘th

SYNONYMS

aho—alas; bata—how strange it is; mahat—great; papam—sins; kartum—to
perform; vyavasitah—have decided; vayam—we; yat—because;
rc‘tjya—sukha-lobhena—driven by greed for royal happiness; hantum—to kill;



sva-janam—kinsmen; udyatc‘th—trying.

TRANSLATION

Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful acts.
Driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness, we are intent on killing our own
kinsmen.

PURPORT

Driven by selfish motives, one may be inclined to such sinful acts as the
killing of one’s own brother, father or mother. There are many such instances
in the history of the world. But Arjuna, being a saintly devotee of the Lord, is
always conscious of moral principles and therefore takes care to avoid such
activities.

TEXT 45

H&HWEIIWWH
We‘rﬁaﬁawmuaxu

yadi mam apratikciram
as’astram s’astra—panayah
dhartarastra rane hanyus
tan me ksemataram bhavet

SYNONYMS

yadi—even if; mam—me; apratikc‘tmm—without being resistant;
as’astram—without being fully equipped; s’astra-pc‘mayah—those with weapons
in hand; dhartarastrah—the sons of Dhrtarastra; rane—on the battlefield;
hanyuh—may kill; tat—that; me—for me; ksema—taram—better;
bhavet—would be.



TRANSLATION

Better for me if the sons of Dhrtarastra, weapons in hand, were to kill me
unarmed and unresisting on the battlefield.

PURPORT

It is the custom—according to ksati'iya fighting principles—that an
unarmed and unwilling foe should not be attacked. Arjuna, however, decided
that even if attacked by the enemy in such an awkward position, he would not
fight. He did not consider how much the other party was bent upon fighting.
All these symptoms are due to soft-heartedness resulting from his being a great
devotee of the Lord.

TEXT 46

WEE"?

Wzaﬁzﬁwml
mmmmlwsu

saﬁjaya uvc‘rca
evam ukwc‘wjunah sankhye
rathopastha upavis’at
visrjya sa—s’aram capam
s’oka-samvigna—manasah

SYNONYMS

saﬂjayah uvc‘tca—Saﬁjaya said; evam—thus; ukwd—saying; arjunah—Arjuna;
sankhye—in the battlefield; ratha—of the chariot; upasthe—on the seat;
updvis’at—sat down again; visrjya—putting aside; sa-s’aram—along with
arrows; cc‘tpam—the bow; s’oka—by lamentation; samvigna—distressed;
manasah—within the mind.



TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his
bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed With grief.

PURPORT

While observing the situation of his enemy, Arjuna stood up on the chariot,
but he was so afflicted with lamentation that he sat down again, setting aside
his bow and arrows. Such a kind and soft-hearted person, in the devotional
service of the Lord, is fit to receive self-knowledge.

Thus end the Bhaktivedahta Purports to the F irst Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of
Kumksetra.

Contents of the Gita Summarized

 

TEXT 1

m sane
a EMT WWMI
W W w: H <2 ||
saﬁjaya uvc‘tca

tam tathd krpayc‘wistam



as’m—pﬁmc‘tkuleksaham
visidahtam idam vc‘tkyam
uvc‘tca madhusﬁdahah

SYNONYMS

saﬁjayah uvc‘tca—Saﬁjaya said; tam—unto Arjuna; tathc‘t—thus; krpayc‘t—by
compassion; avistam—overwhelmed; as’m—pﬁma-c‘tkula—full of tears;
iksaham—eyes; visidahtam—lamenting; idam—these; vc‘tkyam—words;
uvc‘tca—said; madhu—sﬁdahah—the killer of Madhu.

TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion, his mind depressed, his eyes
full of tears, Madhusﬁdana, Krsna, spoke the following words.

PURPORT

Material compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance of the
real self. Compassion for the eternal soul is self-realization. The word
“Madhusﬂdana” is significant in this verse. Lord Krsna killed the demon
Madhu, and now Arjuna wanted Krsna to kill the demon of misunderstanding
that had overtaken him in the discharge of his duty. No one knows where
compassion should be applied. Compassion for the dress of a drowning man is
senseless. A man fallen in the ocean of nescience cannot be saved simply by
rescuing his outward dress—the gross material body. One who does not know
this and laments for the outward dress is called a s’ﬁdi‘a, or one who laments
unnecessarily. Arjuna was a ksati'iya, and this conduct was not expected from
him. Lord Krsna, however, can dissipate the lamentation of the ignorant man,
and for this purpose the Bhagavad-gitc‘t was sung by Him. This chapter instructs
us in self-realization by an analytical study of the material body and the spirit
soul, as explained by the supreme authority, Lord Sri Krsna. This realization is
possible when one works without attachment to fruitive results and is situated
in the fixed conception of the real self.



TEXT 2

W
wwwlaﬁqﬁagqﬁaam
313mm

IIQII

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
kutas tvc‘t kas’malam idam
visame samupasthitam
anarya—justam asvargyam
akirti—karam arjuha

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
kutah—wherefrom; tvc‘I—unto you; kas’malam—dirtiness; idam—this
lamentation; visame—in this hour of crisis; samupasthitam—arrived;
ancirya—persons who do not know the value of life; justam—practiced by;
asvargyam—which does not lead to higher planets; akirti—infamy;
karam—the cause of; arjuha—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, how have these
impurities come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man Who knows the
value of life. They lead not to higher planets but to infamy.

PURPORT

Krsna and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are identical. Therefore
Lord Krsna is referred to as Bhagavan throughout the Gita. Bhagavan is the
ultimate in the Absolute Truth. Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of
understanding, namely Brahman, or the impersonal all-pervasive spirit;



Paramatma, or the localized aspect of the Supreme within the heart of all
living entities; and Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Krsna. In the grimad-Bbégavatam (1.2.11) this conception of the Absolute
Truth is explained thus:

vadcmti tat tattUa—vidas
tattvam yaj jﬁc‘mam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavc‘m iti s’abdyate

“The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of understanding by the
knower of the Absolute Truth, and all of them are identical. Such phases of
the Absolute Truth are expressed as Brahman, Paramatma, and Bhagavan.”

These three divine aspects can be explained by the example of the sun,
which also has three different aspects, namely the sunshine, the sun’s surface
and the sun planet itself. One who studies the sunshine only is the preliminary
student. One who understands the sun’s surface is further advanced. And one
who can enter into the sun planet is the highest. Ordinary students who are
satisfied by simply understanding the sunshine—its universal pervasiveness
and the glaring effulgence of its impersonal nature—may be compared to those
who can realize only the Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth. The student
who has advanced still further can know the sun disc, which is compared to
knowledge of the Paramatma feature of the Absolute Truth. And the student
who can enter into the heart of the sun planet is compared to those who
realize the personal features of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Therefore, the
bhaktas, or the transcendentalists who have realized the Bhagavan feature of
the Absolute Truth, are the topmost transcendentalists, although all students
who are engaged in the study of the Absolute Truth are engaged in the same
subject matter. The sunshine, the sun disc and the inner affairs of the sun
planet cannot be separated from one another, and yet the students of the three
different phases are not in the same category.

The Sanskrit word bhagavc'm is explained by the great authority Parasara
Muni, the father of Vyasadeva. The Supreme Personality who possesses all
riches, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge and all renunciation is



called Bhagavan. There are many persons who are very rich, very powerful,
very beautiful, very famous, very learned, and very much detached, but no one
can claim that he possesses all riches, all strength, etc., entirely. Only Krsna
can claim this because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No living
entity, including Brahma, Lord Siva, or Narayana, can possess opulences as
fully as Krsna. Therefore it is concluded in the Brahma-samhita by Lord
Brahma himself that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No
one is equal to or above Him. He is the primeval Lord, or Bhagavan, known as
Govinda, and He is the supreme cause of all causes:

is’vamh paramah krsnah

sac-cid—c‘mahda—vigrahah
ahadir adir govindah

sarva—karaha—karaham

“There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagavan, but
Krsna is the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the Supreme Person,
and His body is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is the primeval Lord
Govinda and the cause of all causes.” (Brabma-satiillité 5.1)

In the Bhagavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but Krsna is described as the original Personality of
Godhead, from whom many, many incarnations and Personalities of Godhead
expand:

ete cams’a—kalc‘th pumsah
krsnas tu bhagavc‘m svayam
ihdrari—vyc‘tkulam lokam
mrdayanti yuge yuge

“All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are either
plenary expansions or parts of the plenary expansions of the Supreme
Godhead, but Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself.” (Bbég.
1.3.28)

Therefore, Krsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Absolute Truth, the source of both the Supersoul and the impersonal



Brahman.

In the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna’s
lamentation for his kinsmen is certainly unbecoming, and therefore. Krsna
expressed His surprise with the word kutah, “wherefrom.” Such impurities were
never expected from a person belonging to the civilized class of men known as
Aryans. The word Aryan is applicable to persons who know the value of life
and have a civilization based on spiritual realization. Persons who are led by
the material conception of life do not know that the aim of life is realization of
the Absolute Truth, Visnu, or Bhagavan, and they are captivated by the
external features of the material world, and therefore they do not know what
liberation is. Persons who have no knowledge of liberation from material
bondage are called non-Aryans. Although Arjuna was a ksati'iya, he was
deviating from his prescribed duties by declining to fight. This act of
cowardice is described as befitting the non-Aryans. Such deviation from duty
does not help one in the progress of spiritual life, nor does it even give one the
opportunity to become famous in this world. Lord Krsna did not approve of the
so-called compassion of Arjuna for his kinsmen.

TEXT 3

Wmmmzwﬂar—oﬁmﬁl
@mﬁéﬁdaaﬁﬁswuau

klaibyam ma sma gamah pc‘wtha
naitat tvayy upapadyate
ksudram hrdaya—dambalyam
tyaktvottistha parahtapa

SYNONYMS

klaibyam—impotence; ma sma—do not; gamah—take to; pc‘wtha—O son of
Prtha; ha—never; etat—this; tvayi—unto you; upadyate—is befitting;
ksudram—petty; hrdaya—of the heart; dambalyam—weakness;



tyaktvd—giving up; uttistha—get up; param—tapa—O chastiser of the enemies.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not become
you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy.

PURPORT

Arjuna was addressed as the son of Prtha, who happened to be the sister of
Krsna’s father Vasudeva. Therefore Arjuna had a blood relationship with
Krsna. If the son of a ksati'iya declines to fight, he is a ksati'iya in name only,
and if the son of a brc‘thmaha acts impiously, he is a brc‘thmaha in name only.
Such ksatriyas and brc‘thmahas are unworthy sons of their fathers; therefore,
Krsna did not want Arjuna to become an unworthy son of a ksati'iya. Arjuna
was the most intimate friend of Krsna, and Krsna was directly guiding him on
the chariot; but in spite of all these credits, if Arjuna abandoned the battle he
would be committing an infamous act. Therefore Krsna said that such an
attitude in Arjuna did not fit his personality. Arjuna might argue that he
would give up the battle on the grounds of his magnanimous attitude for the
most respectable Bhisma and his relatives, but Krsna considered that sort of
magnanimity mere weakness of heart. Such false magnanimity was not
approved by any authority. Therefore, such magnanimity or so-called
nonviolence should be given up by persons like Arjuna under the direct
guidance of Krsna.

arjuha uvc‘tca



katham bhismam aham sahkhye
droham ca madhusﬁdaha
isubhih pratiyotsyc‘tmi
pﬁjc‘whc‘w ari—sﬁdaha

SYNONYMS

arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; katham—how; bhismam—Bhisma; aham—I;
sahkhye—in the fight; droham—Drona; ca—also; madhu—sﬁdaha—O killer of
Madhu; isubhih—with arrows; pratiyotsyc‘tmi—shall counterattack;
pﬁjc‘t—arhau—those who are worshipable; ari—sﬁdaha—O killer of the enemies.

TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: 0 killer of enemies, 0 killer of Madhu, how can I

counterattack With arrows in battle men like Bhisma and Drona, Who are
worthy of my worship?

PURPORT

Respectable superiors like Bhisma the grandfather and Dronacarya the
teacher are always worshipable. Even if they attack, they should not be
counterattacked. It is general etiquette that superiors are not to be offered
even a verbal fight. Even if they are sometimes harsh in behavior, they should
not be harshly treated. Then, how is it possible for Arjuna to counterattack
them? Would Krsna ever attack His own grandfather, Ugrasena, or His
teacher, Sandipani Muni? These were some of the arguments offered by
Arjuna to Krsna.

TEXT 5
wﬁmmﬁ
wwemee.
WWW



11th:IIi?n=6f€szﬁTeII=LII a ll

gumh ahatvc‘t hi mahc‘mubhc‘wc‘m
s’reyo bhoktum bhaiksyam apiha loke
hatvc‘trtha—kc‘tmc‘tms tu gumh ihaiva
bhuﬁjiya bhogc‘m mdhira—pradigdhc‘m

SYNONYMS

gmﬁh—the superiors; ahatvc't—not killing; hi—certainly;
mahc‘t—ahubhc‘wc‘m—great souls; s’reyah—it is better; bhoktum—to enjoy life;
bhaiksyam—by begging; api—even; iha—in this life; loke—in this world;
hatvc‘t—killing; artha—gain; kamah—desiring; tu—but; gumh—superiors;
iha—in this world; eva—certainly; bhuﬁjiya—one has to enjoy;
bhogc‘m—enjoyable things; rudhira—blood; pradigdhc‘m—tainted with.

TRANSLATION

It would be better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of
the lives of great souls Who are my teachers. Even though desiring worldly gain,

they are superiors. If they are killed, everything we enjoy Will be tainted With
blood.

PURPORT

According to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable
action and has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned. Bhisma
and Drona were obliged to take the side of Duryodhana because of his
financial assistance, although they should not have accepted such a position
simply on financial considerations. Under the circumstances, they have lost
the respectability of teachers. But Arjuna thinks that nevertheless they remain
his superiors, and therefore to enjoy material profits after killing them would
mean to enjoy spoils tainted with blood.



TEXT 6

HW:WW
WWETR’EITHTSIQQH
erﬁaSc—onﬁfeeﬁiémrq—
ésaﬁum: mm: H a N

ha caitad Uidmah katarcm ho gariyo
yad vc‘t jayema yadi ya no jayeyuh
yc‘m eva hatvc‘t ha jijiviscimas
te ’vasthitc‘th pramukhe dhdrtarc‘tstrc‘th

SYNONYMS

ha—nor; ca—also; etat—this; vidmah—do we know; katarat—which;
hah—for us; gariyah—better; yat Ua—whether; jayema—we may conquer;
yadi—if; vc‘t—or; hah—us; jayeyuh—they conquer; yc‘m—those who;
eva—certainly; hatvc‘t—by killing; ha—never; jijivisc‘tmah—we would want to
live; te—all of them; avasthitc‘th—are situated; pramukhe—in the front;
dhc‘trtarc‘tstrdh—the sons of Dhrtarastra.

TRANSLATION

Nor do we know Which is better—conquering them or being conquered by
them. If we killed the sons of Dhrtarastra, we should not care to live. Yet they
are now standing before us on the battlefield.

PURPORT

Arjuna did not know whether he should fight and risk unnecessary
Violence, although fighting is the duty of the ksatriyas, or whether he should
refrain and live by begging. If he did not conquer the enemy, begging would be
his only means of subsistence. Nor was there certainty of Victory, because
either side might emerge Victorious. Even if Victory awaited them (and their



cause was justified), still, if the sons of Dhrtarastra died in battle, it would be
very difficult to live in their absence. Under the circumstances, that would be
another kind of defeat for them. All these considerations by Arjuna definitely
proved that not only was he a great devotee of the Lord but he was also highly
enlightened and had complete control over his mind and senses. His desire to
live by begging, although he was born in the royal household, is another sign of
detachment. He was truly Virtuous, as these qualities, combined with his faith
in the words of instruction of Sri Krsna (his spiritual master), indicate. It is
concluded that Arjuna was quite fit for liberation. Unless the senses are
controlled, there is no chance of elevation to the platform of knowledge, and
without knowledge and devotion there is no chance of liberation. Arjuna was
competent in all these attributes, over and above his enormous attributes in his
material relationships.

TEXT 7

WW

Wduﬁamﬁm

Wzaﬂﬁfaa ﬁaﬁ
Msgsrrfﬁmaimueu

karpahya-dosopahata—svabhcivah
prcchc‘tmi tvc‘m’t dharma-sammﬁdha—cetc‘th
yac chreyah syc‘m his’citam bmhi tan me
s’isyas te ’ham s’c‘tdhi mam tvc‘m’t prapahham

SYNONYMS

kc‘wpahya—of miserliness; dosa—by the weakness; upahata—being afflicted;
sva-bhavah—characteristics; prcchc‘tmi—I am asking; tvc‘Im—unto You;
dharma—religion; sammﬁdha—bewildered; cetc‘Ih—in heart; yat—what;
s’reyah—all-good; syc‘It—may be; his’citam—confidently; brIZhi—tell; tat—that;
me—unto me; s’isyah—disciple; te—Your; aham—I am; s’c‘Idhi—just instruct;



mam—me; tvdm—unto You; prapahham—surrendered.

TRANSLATION

Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of
miserly weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me for certain What
is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You. Please
instruct me.

PURPORT

By nature’s own way the complete system of material activities is a source of
perplexity for everyone. In every step there is perplexity, and therefore it
behooves one to approach a bona fide spiritual master who can give one proper
guidance for executing the purpose of life. All Vedic literatures advise us to
approach a bona fide spiritual master to get free from the perplexities of life,
which happen without our desire. They are like a forest fire that somehow
blazes without being set by anyone. Similarly, the world situation is such’ that
perplexities of life automatically appear, without our wanting such confusion.
No one wants fire, and yet it takes place, and we become perplexed. The Vedic
wisdom therefore advises that in order to solve the perplexities of life and to
understand the science of the solution, one must approach a spiritual master
who is in the disciplic succession. A person with a bona fide spiritual master is
supposed to know everything. One should not, therefore, remain in material
perplexities but should approach a spiritual master. This is the purport of this
verse.

Who is the man in material perplexities? It is he who does not understand
the problems of life. In the Brbad—érarzyaka Upam'gaa (3.8.10) the perplexed
man is described as follows: yo vc‘t etad aksaram gc‘trgy aviditvasmaf lokc‘tt praiti sa
krpahah. “He is a miserly man who does not solve the problems of life as a
human and who thus quits this world like the cats and dogs, without
understanding the science of self-realization.” This human form of life is a
most valuable asset for the living entity who can utilize it for solving the
problems of life; therefore, one who does not utilize this opportunity properly



is a miser. On the other hand, there is the brc‘thmaha, or he who is intelligent
enough to utilize this body to solve all the problems of life. Ya etad aksamm
gc‘trgi viditvcismciflokc‘tt praiti sa brahmahah.

The krpahas, or miserly persons, waste their time in being overly
affectionate for family, society, country, etc., in the material conception of life.
One is often attached to family life, namely to wife, children and other
members, on the basis of “skin disease.” The krpaha thinks that he is able to
protect his family members from death; or the krpaha thinks that his family or
society can save him from the verge of death. Such family attachment can be
found even in the lower animals, who take care of children also. Being
intelligent, Arjuna could understand that his affection for family members and
his wish to protect them from death were the causes of his perplexities.
Although he could understand that his duty to fight was awaiting him, still, on
account of miserly weakness, he could not discharge the duties. He is therefore
asking Lord Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, to make a definite solution.
He offers himself to Krsna as a disciple. He wants to stop friendly talks. Talks
between the master and the disciple are serious, and now Arjuna wants to talk
very seriously before the recognized spiritual master. Krsna is therefore the
original spiritual master of the science of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, and Arjuna is the first
disciple for understanding the Gita. How Arjuna understands the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t is stated in the Gitc't itself. And yet foolish mundane scholars
explain that one need not submit to Krsna as a person, but to “the unborn
within Krsna.” There is no difference between Krsna’s within and without.
And one who has no sense of this understanding is the greatest fool in trying
to understand Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

TEXT 8

ﬁﬁmﬁrm—
ﬂWﬁWﬁWl
WW



WWWII‘II

ha hi prapas’ycimi mamapahudyc‘td
yac chokam ucchosaham ihdriyc‘mc‘tm
avc‘tpya thch‘w asapatham Tddham

rc‘tjyam surc‘mc‘tm api cc‘tdhipatyam

SYNONYMS

ha—do not; hi—certainly; prapas’yc‘tmi—I see; mama—my; apahudyc‘tt—can
drive away; yat—that which; s’okam—lamentation; ucchosaham—drying up;
ihdriyc‘mc‘tm—of the senses; avc‘tpya—achieving; bhﬁmau—on the earth;
asapatham—without rival; Tddham—prosperous; rc‘tjyam—kingdom;
surc‘mc‘tm—of the demigods; api—even; ca—also; adhipatyam—supremacy.

TRANSLATION

I can find no means to drive away this grief Which is drying up my senses. I
Will not be able to dispel it even if I Win a prosperous, unrivaled kingdom on
earth With sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.

PURPORT

Although Arjuna was putting forward so many arguments based on
knowledge of the principles of religion and moral codes, it appears that he was
unable to solve his real problem without the help of the spiritual master, Lord
Sri Krsna. He could understand that his so-called knowledge was useless in
driving away his problems, which were drying up his whole existence; and it
was impossible for him to solve such perplexities without the help of a spiritual
master like Lord Krsna. Academic knowledge, scholarship, high position, etc.,
are all useless in solving the problems of life; help can be given only by a
spiritual master like Krsna. Therefore, the conclusion is that a spiritual master
who is one hundred percent Krsna conscious is the bona fide spiritual master,
for he can solve the problems of life. Lord Caitanya said that one who is master



in the science of Krsna consciousness, regardless of his social position, is the
real spiritual master.

kibc‘t vipra, kibc‘t hyasi, s’ﬁdra kehe haya
yei krsna—tattva—vettc‘t, sei ’gmu’ haya

“It does not matter whether a person is a Uipi‘a [learned scholar in Vedic
wisdom] or is born in a lower family, or is in the renounced order of life—if he
is master in the science of Krsna, he is the perfect and bona fide spiritual
master.” (Caitanya-caritémrta, Madhya 8.128) 80 without being a master in the
science of Krsna consciousness, no one is a bona fide spiritual master. It is also
said in Vedic literature:

sat-karma-hipuho Uipro

mantra—tahtra—vis’c‘wadah
avaishavo gmm ha syc‘td
vaisnavah s’va-paco guruh

“A scholarly brc‘thmaha, expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge, is unfit to
become a spiritual master without being a Vaisnava, or expert in the science of
Krsna consciousness. But a person born in a family of a lower caste can become
a spiritual master if he is a Vaisnava, or Krsna conscious.” (Padma Purc‘ma)

The problems of material existence—birth, old age, disease and
death—cannot be counteracted by accumulation of wealth and economic
development. In many parts of the world there are states which are replete
with all facilities of life, which are full of wealth and economically developed,
yet the problems of material existence are still present. They are seeking peace
in different ways, but they can achieve real happiness only if they consult
Krsna, or the Bhagavad-gitc‘t and Srimad—Bhagavatam—which constitute the
science of Krsna—through the bona fide representative of Krsna, the man in
Krsna consciousness.

If economic development and material comforts could drive away one’s
lamentations for family, social, national or international inebrieties, then
Arjuna would not have said that even an unrivaled kingdom on earth or
supremacy like that of the demigods in the heavenly planets would be unable



to drive away his lamentations. He sought, therefore, refuge in Krsna
consciousness, and that is the right path for peace and harmony. Economic
development or supremacy over the world can be finished at any moment by
the cataclysms of material nature. Even elevation into a higher planetary
situation, as men are now seeking on the moon planet, can also be finished at
one stroke. The Bhagavad-gitc‘t confirms this: ksihe punye martya-lokam Uis’cmti.
“When the results of pious activities are finished, one falls down again from
the peak of happiness to the lowest status of life.” Many politicians of the
world have fallen down in that way. Such downfalls only constitute more
causes for lamentation.

Therefore, if we want to curb lamentation for good, then we have to take
shelter of Krsna, as Arjuna is seeking to do. 80 Arjuna asked Krsna to solve his
problem definitely, and that is the way of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 9

mm
WEQIWW:W:I
aﬁmgﬁﬁﬁmwﬁwsusu

saﬁjaya uvc‘tca
evam uktvc‘t hrsikes’am
gudakes’ah parahtapah
ha yotsya iti govindam
uktvc‘t “25mm babhﬁva ha

SYNONYMS

saﬁjayah uvc‘tca—Saﬁjaya said; evam—thus; uktvc‘t—speaking; hrsikes’am—unto
Krsna, the master of the senses; gudc'tkes’ah—Arjuna, the master of curbing
ignorance; parahtapah—the chastiser of the enemies; ha yotsye—I shall not
fight; iti—thus; govindam—unto Krsna, the giver of pleasure to the senses;
uktvd—saying; tﬁsnim—silent; babhﬁUa—became; ha—certainly.



TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told Krsna,
“Govinda, I shall not fight,” and fell silent.

PURPORT

Dhrtarastra must have been very glad to understand that Arjuna was not
going to fight and was instead leaving the battlefield for the begging
profession. But Saﬁjaya disappointed him again in relating that Arjuna was
competent to kill his enemies (parahtapah). Although Arjuna was, for the time
being, overwhelmed with false grief due to family affection, he surrendered
unto Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, as a disciple. This indicated that he
would soon be free from the false lamentation resulting from family affection
and would be enlightened with perfect knowledge of self-realization, or Krsna
consciousness, and would then surely fight. Thus Dhrtarastra’s joy would be
frustrated, since Arjuna would be enlightened by Krsna and would fight to the
end.

TEXT 10

szmﬁam
WWWHHMI

tam uvc‘tca hrsikes’ah
prahasahh iva bhc‘wata
sehayor ubhayor madhye
visidcmtam idam vacah

SYNONYMS

tam—unto him; uvc‘tca—said; hrsikes’ah—the master of the senses, Krsna;
prahascm—smiling; iva—like that; bhc‘wata—O Dhrtarastra, descendant of



Bharata; sehayoh—of the armies; ubhayoh—of both parties; madhye—between;
visidahtam—unto the lamenting one; idam—the following; vacah—words.

TRANSLATION

O descendant of Bharata, at that time Krsna, smiling, in the midst of both
the armies, spoke the following words to the grief-stricken Arjuna.

PURPORT

The talk was going on between intimate friends, namely the Hrsikes’a and
the Gudakes’a. As friends, both of them were on the same level, but one of
them voluntarily became a student of the other. Krsna was smiling because a
friend had chosen to become a disciple. As Lord of all, He is always in the
superior position as the master of everyone, and yet the Lord agrees to be a
friend, a son, or a lover for a devotee who wants Him in such a role. But when
He was accepted as the master, He at once assumed the role and talked with
the disciple like the master—with gravity, as it is required. It appears that the
talk between the master and the disciple was openly exchanged in the
presence of both armies so that all were benefitted. So the talks of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t are not for any particular person, society, or community, but
they are for all, and friends or enemies are equally entitled to hear them.

TEXT 11

3]"'J'a.'ia'a .
W mama IITEIﬁI
We maﬁa wheat: || 99 ||

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
as’ocyc‘m ahvas’ocas tvam
prajﬁc‘t—vc‘tdams’ ca bhc‘tsase
gatc‘tsﬁh agatc‘tsﬁms’ ca



hc‘mus’ocahti pahditc‘th

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; as’ocyc‘m—not
worthy of lamentation; ahvas’ocah—you are lamenting; tvam—you;
prajﬁc‘t—vcidah—learned talks; ca—also; bhasase—speaking; gata—lost;
asﬁh—life; agata—not past; asﬁh—life; ca—also; ha—never;
anus’ocahti—lament; pahditc‘th—the learned.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: While speaking learned words,
you are mourning for What is not worthy of grief. Those Who are Wise lament
neither for the living nor for the dead.

PURPORT

The Lord at once took the position of the teacher and chastised the
student, calling him, indirectly, a fool. The Lord said, “You are talking like a
learned man, but you do not know that one who is learned—one who knows
what is body and what is soul—does not lament for any stage of the body,
neither in the living nor in the dead condition.” As explained in later
chapters, it will be clear that knowledge means to know matter and spirit and
the controller of both. Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given
more importance than politics or sociology, but he did not know that
knowledge of matter, soul and the Supreme is even more important than
religious formularies. And because he was lacking in that knowledge, he should
not have posed himself as a very learned man. As he did not happen to be a
very learned man, he was consequently lamenting for something which was
unworthy of lamentation. The body is born and is destined to be vanquished
today or tomorrow; therefore the body is not as important as the soul. One who
knows this is actually learned, and for him there is no cause for lamentation,
regardless of the condition of the material body.



TEXT 12

Hc—éiara‘sngmeﬁaiﬁﬁwiﬁmzl
HQﬁWzaﬁmzmImu

ha tv evc‘tham jc‘Itu hasam
ha tvam heme jamidhipc‘th
ha caiva ha bhavisyc‘tmah
sarve vayam atah param

SYNONYMS

ha—never; tu—but; eva—certainly; aham—I; jc‘ttu—at any time; ha—did not;
asam—exist; ha—not; tvam—you; ha—not; ime—all these;
jaha—adhipc‘th—kings; ha—never; ca—also; eva—certainly; ha—not;
bhavisyc‘tmah—shall exist; sarve vayam—all of us; atah param—hereafter.

TRANSLATION

Never was there a time When I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings;
nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.

PURPORT

In the Vedas, in the Katha Upcmisad as well as in the Svetasvatara Upcmisad,
it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the maintainer of
innumerable living entities, in terms of their different situations according to
individual work and reaction of work. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is
also, by His plenary portions, alive in the heart of every living entity. Only
saintly persons who can see, within and without, the same Supreme Lord can
actually attain to perfect and eternal peace.

m'tyo hitycmc‘tm cetcmas’ cetahc‘mc‘tm
eko bahﬁnc‘tm yo vidadhc‘tti kaman



tam citma-stham ye ’hupas’yahti dhirc‘ts
tesc‘tm s’c‘mtih s’c‘ts’vati hetaresc‘tm

The same Vedic truth given to Arjuna is given to all persons in the world
who pose themselves as very learned but factually have but a poor fund of
knowledge. The Lord says clearly that He Himself, Arjuna and all the kings
who are assembled on the battlefield are eternally individual beings and that
the Lord is eternally the maintainer of the individual living entities both in
their conditioned and in their liberated situations. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the supreme individual person, and Arjuna, the Lord’s eternal
associate, and all the kings assembled there are individual eternal persons. It is
not that they did not exist as individuals in the past, and it is not that they will
not remain eternal persons. Their individuality existed in the past, and their
individuality will continue in the future without interruption. Therefore,
there is no cause for lamentation for anyone.

The Mayavadi theory that after liberation the individual soul, separated by
the covering of mciyc't, or illusion, will merge into the impersonal Brahman and
lose its individual existence is not supported herein by Lord Krsna, the
supreme authority. Nor is the theory that we only think of individuality in the
conditioned state supported herein. Krsna clearly says herein that in the
future also the individuality of the Lord and others, as it is confirmed in the
Upcmisads, will continue eternally. This statement of Krsna’s is authoritative
because Krsna cannot be subject to illusion. If individuality were not a fact,
then Krsna would not have stressed it so much—even for the future. The
Mayavadi may argue that the individuality spoken of by Krsna is not spiritual,
but material. Even accepting the argument that the individuality is material,
then how can one distinguish Krsna’s individuality? Krsna affirms His
individuality in the past and confirms His individuality in the future also. He
has confirmed His individuality in many ways, and impersonal Brahman has
been declared to be subordinate to Him. Krsna has maintained spiritual
individuality all along; if He is accepted as an ordinary conditioned soul in
individual consciousness, then His Bhagavad-gitc‘t has no value as authoritative
scripture. A common man with all the four defects of human frailty is unable
to teach that which is worth hearing. The Gitc't is above such literature. No



mundane book compares with the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. When one accepts Krsna as
an ordinary man, the Gitc't loses all importance. The Mayavadi argues that the
plurality mentioned in this verse is conventional and that it refers to the body.
But previous to this verse such a bodily conception is already condemned.
After condemning the bodily conception of the living entities, how was it
possible for Krsna to place a conventional proposition on the body again?
Therefore, individuality is maintained on spiritual grounds and is thus
confirmed by great cicc'n‘yas like Sri Ramanuja and others. It is clearly
mentioned in many places in the Gitc't that this spiritual individuality is
understood by those who are devotees of the Lord. Those who are envious of
Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no bona fide access to the
great literature. The nondevotee’s approach to the teachings of the Gitc't is
something like that of a bee licking on a bottle of honey. One cannot have a
taste of honey unless one opens the bottle. Similarly, the mysticism of the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t can be understood only by devotees, and no one else can taste it,
as it is stated in the Fourth Chapter of the book. Nor can the Gitc't be touched
by persons who envy the very existence of the Lord. Therefore, the Mayavadi
explanation of the Gitc't is a most misleading presentation of the whole truth.
Lord Caitanya has forbidden us to read commentations made by the Mayavadis
and warns that one who takes to such an understanding of the Mayavadi
philosophy loses all power to understand the real mystery of the Gita. If
individuality refers to the empirical universe, then there is no need of teaching
by the Lord. The plurality of the individual soul and of the Lord is an eternal
fact, and it is confirmed by the Vedas as above mentioned.

TEXT 13

aﬁsmmaﬁ'ﬁnﬁéﬁaﬁtﬂl
amaeﬁtmfﬁa‘iﬁaﬁﬁaﬁruesu

dehiho ’smih yathc‘t dehe
kaumc‘tram yauvaham jam
tathd dehc‘mtara-prc‘tptir



dhiras tatra ha muhyati

SYNONYMS

dehihah—of the embodied; asmih—in this; yathc‘t—as; dehe—in the body;
kaumc‘tram—boyhood; yauvaham—youth; jard—old age; tathc‘I—similarly;
deha-cmtara—of transference of the body; prc‘tptih—achievement; dhirah—the
sober; tatra—thereupon; ha—never; muhyati—is deluded.

TRANSLATION

As the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. A sober
person is not bewildered by such a change.

PURPORT

Since every living entity is an individual soul, each is changing his body
every moment, manifesting sometimes as a child, sometimes as a youth, and
sometimes as an old man. Yet the same spirit soul is there and does not
undergo any change. This individual soul finally changes the body at death
and transmigrates to another body; and since it is sure to have another body in
the next birth—either material or spiritual—there was no cause for
lamentation by Arjuna on account of death, neither for Bhisma nor for Drona,
for whom he was so much concerned. Rather, he should rejoice for their
changing bodies from old to new ones, thereby rejuvenating their energy. Such
changes of body account for varieties of enjoyment or suffering, according to
one’s work in life. So Bhisma and Drona, being noble souls, were surely going
to have spiritual bodies in the next life, or at least life in heavenly bodies for
superior enjoyment of material existence. So, in either case, there was no cause
of lamentation.

Any man who has perfect knowledge of the constitution of the individual
soul, the Supersoul, and nature—both material and spiritual—is called a dhira,
or a most sober man. Such a man is never deluded by the change of bodies.



The Mayavadi theory of oneness of the spirit soul cannot be entertained, on
the ground that the spirit soul cannot be cut into pieces as a fragmental
portion. Such cutting into different individual souls would make the Supreme
cleavable or changeable, against the principle of the Supreme Soul’s being
unchangeable. As confirmed in the Gita, the fragmental portions of the
Supreme exist eternally (samitaha) and are called ksam; that is, they have a
tendency to fall down into material nature. These fragmental portions are
eternally so, and even after liberation the individual soul remains the
same—fragmental. But once liberated, he lives an eternal life in bliss and
knowledge with the Personality of Godhead. The theory of reflection can be
applied to the Supersoul, who is present in each and every individual body and
is known as the Paramatma. He is different from the individual living entity.
When the sky is reflected in water, the reflections represent both the sun and
the moon and the stars also. The stars can be compared to the living entities
and the sun or the moon to the Supreme Lord. The individual fragmental
spirit soul is represented by Arjuna, and the Supreme Soul is the Personality of
Godhead Sri Krsna. They are not on the same level, as it will be apparent in
the beginning of the Fourth Chapter. If Arjuna is on the same level with
Krsna, and Krsna is not superior to Arjuna, then their relationship of
instructor and instructed becomes meaningless. If both of them are deluded by
the illusory energy (mciyc't), then there is no need of one being the instructor
and the other the instructed. Such instruction would be useless because, in the
clutches of mciyc't, no one can be an authoritative instructor. Under the
circumstances, it is admitted that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord, superior in
position to the living entity, Arjuna, who is a forgetful soul deluded by mciyc't.

TEXT 14

Wﬁﬁusﬁeﬁwzw
WMSﬁerrarﬁeﬁmam II 98 ||

mcitrc‘t—spars’c‘ts tu kauhteya

s’itosna—sukha-duhkha—dah



cigamc‘tpciyiho ’hityc‘ts
tc‘m’ts titiksasva bhc‘wata

SYNONYMS

mcitrc‘t—spars’c‘th—sensory perception; tu—only; kauhteya—O son of Kunti;
s’ita—winter; usna—summer; sukha—happiness; duhkha—and pain;
dah—giving; cigama—appearing; apc'tyihah—disappearing;
cmityc'th—nonpermanent; tc'm—all of them; titiksasva—just try to tolerate;
bhamta—O descendant of the Bharata dynasty.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and
their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of
Winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of
Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them Without being disturbed.

PURPORT

In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate nonpermanent
appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress. According to Vedic
injunction, one has to take his bath early in the morning even during the
month of Magha (January-February). It is very cold at that time, but in spite of
that a man who abides by the religious principles does not hesitate to take his
bath. Similarly, a woman does not hesitate to cook in the kitchen in the
months of May and June, the hottest part of the summer season. One has to
execute his duty in spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is the
religious principle of the ksatriyas, and although one has to fight with some
friend or relative, one should not deviate from his prescribed duty. One has to
follow the prescribed rules and regulations of religious principles in order to
rise up to the platform of knowledge, because by knowledge and devotion only
can one liberate himself from the clutches of mciyc't (illusion).

The two different names of address given to Arjuna are also significant. To



address him as Kaunteya signifies his great blood relations from his mother’s
side; and to address him as Bharata signifies his greatness from his father’s side.
From both sides he is supposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage brings
responsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore, he cannot
avoid fighting.

TEXT 15

?EHEWWWI
angﬂglaizﬁiakaaammﬁu ?‘ill

yam hi ha vyathaycmty ete
purusam purusarsabha
sama-duhkha—sukham dhiram
so ’mrtatvc‘tya kalpate

SYNONYMS

yam—one to whom; hi—certainly; ha—never; vyathayahti—are distressing;
ete—all these; purusam—to a person; purusa—Tsabha—O best among men;
sama—unaltered; duhkha—in distress; sukham—and happiness;
dhiram—patient; sah—he; amrtatvc‘tya—for liberation; kalpate—is considered
eligible.

TRANSLATION

0 best among men [Arjuna], the person Who is not disturbed by happiness
and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for liberation.

PURPORT

Anyone who is steady in his determination for the advanced stage of
spiritual realization and can equally tolerate the onslaughts of distress and
happiness is certainly a person eligible for liberation. In the vamas’mma



institution, the fourth stage of life, namely the renounced order (sannyc‘tsa), is
a painstaking situation. But one who is serious about making his life perfect
surely adopts the sannyc‘tsa order of life in spite of all difficulties. The
difficulties usually arise from having to sever family relationships, to give up
the connection of wife and children. But if anyone is able to tolerate such
difficulties, surely his path to spiritual realization is complete. Similarly, in
Arjuna’s discharge of duties as a ksati'iya, he is advised to persevere, even if it
is difficult to fight with his family members or similarly beloved persons. Lord
Caitanya took sannyc‘tsa at the age of twenty-four, and His dependents, young
wife as well as old mother, had no one else to look after them. Yet for a higher
cause He took sannyc‘tsa and was steady in the discharge of higher duties. That
is the way of achieving liberation from material bondage.

TEXT 16

Hraaiﬁaﬁma‘rﬁwa‘rﬁaﬁaazl
WQEISWEIr—oﬁﬁiﬁzueeu

misato vidyate bhc‘wo
habhc‘wo vidyate satah
ubhayor api drsto ’htas
tv cmayos tattva—dars’ibhih

SYNONYMS

ha—never; asatah—of the nonexistent; vidyate—there is;
bhc‘wah—endurance; ha—never; abhc‘wah—changing quality; vidyate—there is;
satah—of the eternal; ubhayoh—of the two; api—verily; drstah—observed;

antah—conclusion; tu—indeed; cmayoh—of them; tattva—of the truth;
dars’ibhih—by the seers.

TRANSLATION
Those Who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent [the



material body] there is no endurance and of the eternal [the soul] there is no
change. This they have concluded by studying the nature of both.

PURPORT

There is no endurance of the changing body. That the body is changing
every moment by the actions and reactions of the different cells is admitted by
modern medical science; and thus growth and old age are taking place in the
body. But the spirit soul exists permanently, remaining the same despite all
changes of the body and the mind. That is the difference between matter and
spirit. By nature, the body is ever changing, and the soul is eternal. This
conclusion is established by all classes of seers of the truth, both impersonalist
and personalist. In the Vzlsrzu Purina (2.12.38) it is stated that Visnu and His
abodes all have self-illuminated spiritual existence (jyotimsi visuur bhuvahc‘mi
UiShuh). The words existent and nonexistent refer only to spirit and matter.
That is the version of all seers of truth.

This is the beginning of the instruction by the Lord to the living entities
who are bewildered by the influence of ignorance. Removal of ignorance
involves the reestablishment of the eternal relationship between the worshiper
and the worshipable and the consequent understanding of the difference
between the part-and-parcel living entities and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One can understand the nature of the Supreme by thorough study
of oneself, the difference between oneself and the Supreme being understood
as the relationship between the part and the whole. In the Vedc'mta-sﬁtms, as
well as in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Supreme has been accepted as the
origin of all emanations. Such emanations are experienced by superior and
inferior natural sequences. The living entities belong to the superior nature, as
it will be revealed in the Seventh Chapter. Although there is no difference
between the energy and the energetic, the energetic is accepted as the
Supreme, and energy or nature is accepted as the subordinate. The living
entities, therefore, are always subordinate to the Supreme Lord, as in the case
of the master and the servant, or the teacher and the taught. Such clear
knowledge is impossible to understand under the spell of ignorance, and to



drive away such ignorance the Lord teaches the Bhagavad-gitc‘t for the
enlightenment of all living entities for all time.

TEXT 17

quﬁaﬁﬁdaml
WHWHNII

avihc‘ts’i tu tad viddhi
yena sarvam idam tatam
vinc‘ts’am avyayasycisya
ha kas’cit kartum arhati

SYNONYMS

avihc‘ts’i—imperishable; tu—but; tat—that; viddhi—know it; yeha—by whom;
sarvam—all of the body; idam—this; tatam—pervaded; Uihas’am—destruction;
avyayasya—of the imperishable; asya—of it; met kas’cit—no one; kartum—to
do; arhati—is able.

TRANSLATION

That Which pervades the entire body you should know to be indestructible.
No one is able to destroy that imperishable soul.

PURPORT

This verse more clearly explains the real nature of the soul, which is spread
all over the body. Anyone can understand what is spread all over the body: it is
consciousness. Everyone is conscious of the pains and pleasures of the body in
part or as a whole. This spreading of consciousness is limited within one’s own
body. The pains and pleasures of one body are unknown to another. Therefore,
each and every body is the embodiment of an individual soul, and the symptom
of the soul’s presence is perceived as individual consciousness. This soul is



described as one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hair point in
size. The Svetés”vatara Upam'gaa (5.9) confirms this:

balagra—s’ata-bhc‘tgasya
s’atadhc‘t kalpitasya ca
bhago jivah vijﬁeyah

sa cc‘mahtyc‘tya kalpate

“When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and
again each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts, each such
part is the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul.” Similarly the same
version is stated:

kes’c‘tgra—s’ata-bhc‘tgasya
s’atc‘tms’ah sadrs’c‘ttmakah
jivah sﬁksma—svarﬁpo ’yam
sahkhyc‘ttito hi cit—kahah
[Cc. Madya 19.140]

“There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured as
one ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair.”

Therefore, the individual particle of spirit soul is a spiritual atom smaller
than the material atoms, and such atoms are innumerable. This very small
spiritual spark is the basic principle of the material body, and the influence of
such a spiritual spark is spread all over the body as the influence of the active
principle of some medicine spreads throughout the body. This current of the
spirit soul is felt all over the body as consciousness, and that is the proof of the
presence of the soul. Any layman can understand that the material body minus
consciousness is a dead body, and this consciousness cannot be revived in the
body by any means of material administration. Therefore, consciousness is not
due to any amount of material combination, but to the spirit soul. In the
Mandala! Upam'gaa (3.1.9) the measurement of the atomic spirit soul is further
explained:

eso ’hur citmc‘t cetasc‘t veditavyo
yasmih prc‘mah paﬁcadhc‘t samvives’a



prc‘mais’ cittam sarvam otam prajc‘mc‘tm
yasmih vis’uddhe vibhavaty esa citmd

“The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect intelligence.
This atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air (puma, apdha, vyc‘ma,
samaha and udc'ma), is situated within the heart, and spreads its influence all
over the body of the embodied living entities. When the soul is purified from
the contamination of the five kinds of material air, its spiritual influence is
exhibited.”

The hatha-yoga system is meant for controlling the five kinds of air
encircling the pure soul by different kinds of sitting postures—not for any
material profit, but for liberation of the minute soul from the entanglement of
the material atmosphere.

So the constitution of the atomic soul is admitted in all Vedic literatures,
and it is also actually felt in the practical experience of any sane man. Only
the insane man can think of this atomic soul as all-pervading UiShu-tattva.

The inﬂuence of the atomic soul can be spread all over a particular body.
According to the Mundaka Upcmisad, this atomic soul is situated in the heart
of every living entity, and because the measurement of the atomic soul is
beyond the power of appreciation of the material scientists, some of them
assert foolishly that there is no soul. The individual atomic soul is definitely
there in the heart along with the Supersoul, and thus all the energies of bodily
movement are emanating from this part of the body. The corpuscles which
carry the oxygen from the lungs gather energy from the soul. When the soul
passes away from this position, the activity of the blood, generating fusion,
ceases. Medical science accepts the importance of the red corpuscles, but it
cannot ascertain that the source of the energy is the soul. Medical science,
however, does admit that the heart is the seat of all energies of the body.

Such atomic particles of the spirit whole are compared to the sunshine
molecules. In the sunshine there are innumerable radiant molecules. Similarly,
the fragmental parts of the Supreme Lord are atomic sparks of the rays of the
Supreme Lord, called by the name prabhc‘t, or superior energy. 80 whether one
follows Vedic knowledge or modern science, one cannot deny the existence of
the spirit soul in the body, and the science of the soul is explicitly described in



the Bhagavad-gitc‘t by the Personality of Godhead Himself.

TEXT 18

Wﬁﬁaﬁaﬁmmﬁﬁwu
WSWWWIIFII

antavcmta ime dehc‘t
hityasyoktc‘th s’aririhah
anas’iho ’prameyasya
tasmc‘td yudhyasva bhc‘wata

SYNONYMS

anta—vahtah—perishable; ime—all these; dehc‘Ih—material bodies;
hityasya—eternal in existence; uktc‘Ih—are said; s’aririhah—of the embodied
soul; anas’ihah—never to be destroyed; aprameyasya—immeasurable;
tasmc‘It—therefore; yudhyasva—fight; bhc‘wata—O descendant of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

The material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal living
entity is sure to come to an end; therefore, fight, 0 descendant of Bharata.

PURPORT

The material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately, or it
may do so after a hundred years. It is a question of time only. There is no
chance of maintaining it indefinitely. But the spirit soul is so minute that it
cannot even be seen by an enemy, to say nothing of being killed. As
mentioned in the previous verse, it is so small that no one can have any idea
how to measure its dimension. So from both Viewpoints there is no cause of
lamentation, because the living entity as he is cannot be killed nor can the
material body be saved for any length of time or permanently protected. The



minute particle of the whole spirit acquires this material body according to his
work, and therefore observance of religious principles should be utilized. In the
Vedc'mta-sﬁtms the living entity is qualified as light because he is part and
parcel of the supreme light. As sunlight maintains the entire universe, so the
light of the soul maintains this material body. As soon as the spirit soul is out
of this material body, the body begins to decompose; therefore it is the spirit
soul which maintains this body. The body itself is unimportant. Arjuna was
advised to fight and not sacrifice the cause of religion for material, bodily
considerations.

TEXT 19
aﬁaﬁrmﬁaﬁﬁwﬁmI
ﬁa‘iaﬁaﬁe‘rtaﬁeﬁramﬁuequ

ya eham vetti hahtc‘tram
yas’ caiham mahyate hatam
ubhau tau ha vijc‘mito
hayam hahti ha hahyate

SYNONYMS

yah—anyone who; enam—this; vetti—knows; hahtc‘tram—the killer;
yah—anyone who; ca—also; enam—this; manyate—thinks; hatam—killed;
ubhau—both; tau—they; ha—never; vijc‘mitah—are in knowledge; ha—never;
ayam—this; hahti—kills; ha—nor; hcmyate—is killed.

TRANSLATION

Neither he Who thinks the living entity the slayer nor he Who thinks it slain
is in knowledge, for the self slays not nor is slain.

PURPORT



When an embodied living entity is hurt by fatal weapons, it is to be known
that the living entity within the body is not killed. The spirit soul is so small
that it is impossible to kill him by any material weapon, as will be evident from
subsequent verses. Nor is the living entity killable, because of his spiritual
constitution. What is killed, or is supposed to be killed, is the body only. This,
however, does not at all encourage killing of the body. The Vedic injunction is
met himsyc'tt sarvc‘t bhﬁtc'mi: never commit Violence to anyone. Nor does
understanding that the living entity is not killed encourage animal slaughter.
Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominable and is punishable
by the law of the state as well as by the law of the Lord. Arjuna, however, is
being engaged in killing for the principle of religion, and not whimsically.

TEXT 20

Hamﬁfavﬁraimﬁ—
mwﬁmﬁmmmﬁzl
asiiﬁeqzsnseiissigmﬁ
HWWSR‘EIIQMI

ha jayate mriyate vc‘t kadacih
hayam thZtvc‘t bhavitc‘t vc‘t ha bhﬁyah
ajo m'tyah s’c‘ts’vato ’yam purc‘mo
ha hanyate hanyamc‘me s’arire

SYNONYMS

ha—never; jayate—takes birth; mriyate—dies; Ua—either; kadc‘tcit—at any
time (past, present or future); ha—never; ayam—this; thZtUc't—having come
into being; bhavitc‘t—will come to be; Ua—or; ha—not; bhﬁyah—or is again
coming to be; ajah—unborn; m'tyah—eternal; s’c'ts’vatah—permanent;
ayam—this; purc‘mah—the oldest; ha—never; hanyate—is killed;
hahyamc‘me—being killed; s’arire—the body.



TRANSLATION

For the soul there is neither birth nor death at any time. He has not come
into being, does not come into being, and Will not come into being. He is
unborn, eternal, ever-existing and primeval. He is not slain When the body is
slain.

PURPORT

Qualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit is one
with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body. Sometimes the soul
is called the steady, or kata-stha. The body is subject to six kinds of
transformations. It takes its birth from the womb of the mother’s body, remains
for some time, grows, produces some effects, gradually dwindles, and at last
vanishes into oblivion. The soul, however, does not go through such changes.
The soul is not born, but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes
its birth. The soul does not take birth there, and the soul does not die.
Anything which has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth,
he therefore has no past, present or future. He is eternal, ever-existing, and
primeval—that is, there is no trace in history of his coming into being. Under
the impression of the body, we seek the history of birth, etc., of the soul. The
soul does not at any time become old, as the body does. The so-called old man,
therefore, feels himself to be in the same spirit as in his childhood or youth.
The changes of the body do not affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate
like a tree, nor anything material. The soul has no by-product either. The
by-products of the body, namely children, are also different individual souls;
and, owing to the body, they appear as children of a particular man. The body
develops because of the soul’s presence, but the soul has neither offshoots nor
change. Therefore, the soul is free from the six changes of the body.

In the Katha Upam'gaa (1.2.18) we also find a similar passage, which reads:

ha jayate mriyate vc‘t vipas’cih
hayam kutas’cih ha babhﬁva kas’cit



ajo m'tyah s’c‘ts’vato ’yam purc‘mo
ha hanyate hanyamc‘me s’arire
[Bg. 2.20]

The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t,
but here in this verse there is one special word, vipas’cit, which means learned
or with knowledge.

The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness. Therefore,
consciousness is the symptom of the soul. Even if one does not find the soul
within the heart, where he is situated, one can still understand the presence of
the soul simply by the presence of consciousness. Sometimes we do not find the
sun in the sky owing to clouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the
sun is always there, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon
as there is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we can understand that
the sun is in the sky. Similarly, since there is some consciousness in all
bodies—whether man or animal—we can understand the presence of the soul.
This consciousness of the soul is, however, different from the consciousness of
the Supreme because the supreme consciousness is all-knowledge—past,
present and future. The consciousness of the individual soul is prone to be
forgetful. When he is forgetful of his real nature, he obtains education and
enlightenment from the superior lessons of Krsna. But Krsna is not like the
forgetful soul. If so, Krsna’s teachings of Bhagavad-gitc‘t would be useless.

There are two kinds of souls—namely the minute particle soul (ahu-c'ttmc't)

and the Supersoul (Uibhu-c'ttmc't). This is also confirmed in the Katha Upcmisad
(1.2.20) in this way:

ahor ahiyc‘m mahato mahiyc‘m

citmc‘tsya jcmtor m'hito guhc‘tyc‘tm

tam akmtuh pas’yati vita-s’oko
dhc‘ttuh prascidc‘m mahimc‘mam dtmcmah

“Both the Supersoul [Paramatma] and the atomic soul [jivc'ttmc't] are situated
on the same tree of the body within the same heart of the living being, and
only one who has become free from all material desires as well as lamentations
can, by the grace of the Supreme, understand the glories of the soul.” Krsna is



the fountainhead of the Supersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following
chapters, and Arjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore
he requires to be enlightened by Krsna, or by His bona fide representative (the
spiritual master).

TEXT 21
WWHWI
WawzmeWwﬁraﬁamuqeu

vedavihc‘ts’iham m'tyam

ya enam ajam avyayam
katham sa purusah pc‘wtha
kam ghc‘ttayati hahti kam

SYNONYMS

veda—knows; aUihds’iham—indestructible; hityam—always existing; yah—one
who; enam—this (soul); ajam—unborn; avyayam—immutable; katham—how;
sah—that; purusah—person; pc‘wtha—O Partha (Arjuna); kam—whom;
ghc‘ttayati—causes to hurt; hahti—kills; kam—whom.

TRANSLATION

O Partha, how can a person Who knows that the soul is indestructible,
eternal, unborn and immutable kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?

PURPORT

Everything has its proper utility, and a man who is situated in complete
knowledge knows how and where to apply a thing for its proper utility.
Similarly, Violence also has its utility, and how to apply Violence rests with the
person in knowledge. Although the justice of the peace awards capital
punishment to a person condemned for murder, the justice of the peace



cannot be blamed, because he orders Violence to another person according to
the codes of justice. In Mahu-samhita, the lawbook for mankind, it is supported
that a murderer should be condemned to death so that in his next life he will
not have to suffer for the great sin he has committed. Therefore, the king’s
punishment of hanging a murderer is actually beneficial. Similarly, when
Krsna orders fighting, it must be concluded that Violence is for supreme
justice, and thus Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well that such
Violence, committed in the act of fighting for Krsna, is not Violence at all
because, at any rate, the man, or rather the soul, cannot be killed; so for the
administration of justice, so-called Violence is permitted. A surgical operation
is not meant to kill the patient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be
executed by Arjuna at the instruction of Krsna is with full knowledge, so there
is no possibility of sinful reaction.

TEXT 22

amfﬁrsﬁUﬁF—‘rumﬁm

Wwﬁﬁﬁswﬁrl

ammﬁtrfﬁrﬁmsﬁvri—
Wﬁmﬁwﬁaﬁumu

Udsdmsi jimdhi yathc‘t vihc‘tya
havdm' grhhc‘tti haro ’parc‘mi
tathd s’arirc‘mi vihc‘tya jimc‘my
ahyc‘mi samyc‘tti havdhi dehi

SYNONYMS

vc‘tsc‘tmsi—garments; jimc‘mi—old and worn out; yathc‘t—just as; vihc‘Iya—giving
up; havc‘mi—new garments; grhhc‘tti—does accept; harah—a man;
aparc‘mi—others; tathc‘t—in the same way; s’arirc‘mi—bodies; vihc‘Iya—giving up;
jimc‘mi—old and useless; anyahi—different; samyciti—Verily accepts;
havc‘mi—new sets; dehi—the embodied.



TRANSLATION

As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, the soul similarly
accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.

PURPORT

Change of body by the atomic individual soul is an accepted fact. Even the
modern scientists who do not believe in the existence of the soul, but at the
same time cannot explain the source of energy from the heart, have to accept
continuous changes of body which appear from childhood to boyhood and
from boyhood to youth and again from youth to old age. From old age, the
change is transferred to another body. This has already been explained in a
previous verse (2.13).

Transference of the atomic individual soul to another body is made possible
by the grace of the Supersoul. The Supersoul fulfills the desire of the atomic
soul as one friend fulfills the desire of another. The Vedas, like the Mundaka
Upcmisad, as well as the Svetasvatara Upcmisad, compare the soul and the
Supersoul to two friendly birds sitting on the same tree. One of the birds (the
individual atomic soul) is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other bird
(Krsna) is simply watching His friend. Of these two birds—although they are
the same in quality—one is captivated by the fruits of the material tree, while
the other is simply witnessing the activities of His friend. Krsna is the
witnessing bird, and Arjuna is the eating bird. Although they are friends, one
is still the master and the other is the servant. Forgetfulness of this
relationship by the atomic soul is the cause of one’s changing his position from
one tree to another, or from one body to another. The jiva soul is struggling
very hard on the tree of the material body, but as soon as he agrees to accept
the other bird as the supreme spiritual master—as Arjuna agreed to do by
voluntary surrender unto Krsna for instruction—the subordinate bird
immediately becomes free from all lamentations. Both the Mandala Upam'gad
(3.1.2) and gvetéswatara Upamlsaa (4.7) confirm this:



samc‘me vrkse puruso nimagno
’his’ayc‘t s’ocati muhyamc‘mah
justam yada pas’yaty anyam is’am
asya mahimc‘mam iti Uita—s’okah

“Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird is fully
engrossed with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits of the tree.
But if in some way or other he turns his face to his friend who is the Lord and
knows His glories—at once the suffering bird becomes free from all anxieties.”
Arjuna has now turned his face towards his eternal friend, Krsna, and is
understanding the Bhagavad-gitc‘t from Him. And thus, hearing from Krsna, he
can understand the supreme glories of the Lord and be free from lamentation.

Arjuna is advised herewith by the Lord not to lament for the bodily change
of his old grandfather and his teacher. He should rather be happy to kill their
bodies in the righteous fight so that they may be cleansed at once of all
reactions from various bodily activities. One who lays down his life on the
sacrificial altar, or in the proper battlefield, is at once cleansed of bodily
reactions and promoted to a higher status of life. So there was no cause for
Arjuna’s lamentation.

TEXT 23

ﬁﬁﬁmﬁawﬁrﬁﬁﬁﬁrwn
?%WHMWHIQBII

haiham chihdahti s’astrc‘mi
haiham dahati pc‘wakah
ha caiham kledayahty cipo
ha s’osayati mc‘wutah

SYNONYMS

ha—never; enam—this soul; chihdcmti—can cut to pieces; s’astrc‘mi—weapons;
ha—never; enam—this soul; dahati—burns; pcivakah—fire; ha—never;



ca—also; enam—this soul; kledaycmti—moistens; cipah—water; ha—never;
s’osayati—dries; mc‘wutah—wind.

TRANSLATION

The soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor burned by fire, nor
moistened by water, nor withered by the Wind.

PURPORT

All kinds of weapons—swords, flame weapons, rain weapons, tornado
weapons, etc.—are unable to kill the spirit soul. It appears that there were
many kinds of weapons made of earth, water, air, ether, etc., in addition to the
modern weapons of fire. Even the nuclear weapons of the modern age are
classified as fire weapons, but formerly there were other weapons made of all
different types of material elements. Firearms were counteracted by water
weapons, which are now unknown to modern science. Nor do modern
scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons. Nonetheless, the soul can never
be cut into pieces, nor annihilated by any number of weapons, regardless of
scientific devices.

The Mayavadi cannot explain how the individual soul came into existence
simply by ignorance and consequently became covered by illusory energy. Nor
was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the original Supreme Soul;
rather, the individual souls are eternally separated parts of the Supreme Soul.
Because they are atomic individual souls eternally (sahc'ttaha), they are prone
to be covered by the illusory energy, and thus they become separated from the
association of the Supreme Lord, just as the sparks of a fire, although one in
quality with the fire, are prone to be extinguished when out of the fire. In the
Varaha Puraha, the living entities are described as separated parts and parcels
of the Supreme. They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gitc‘t also. 80,
even after being liberated from illusion, the living entity remains a separate
identity, as is evident from the teachings of the Lord to Arjuna. Arjuna
became liberated by the knowledge received from Krsna, but he never became
one with Krsna.



TEXT 24

aﬁe‘rswaisanwsshm Her e I
ﬁler: 861m: W831 mm: H Q8 ||

acchedyo ’yam adahyo ’yam
akledyo ’s’osya eva ca

m'tyah sarva—gatah sthc‘mm
acalo ’yam sahatcmah

SYNONYMS

acchedyah—unbreakable; ayam—this soul; adahyah—unable to be burned;
ayam—this soul; akledyah—insoluble; as’osyah—not able to be dried;
eva—certainly; ca—and; hityah—everlasting; sarva-gatah—all-pervading;
sthc‘muh—unchangeable; acalah—immovable; ayam—this soul;
sahatahah—eternally the same.

TRANSLATION

This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither burned
nor dried. He is everlasting, present everywhere, unchangeable, immovable and
eternally the same.

PURPORT

All these qualifications of the atomic soul definitely prove that the
individual soul is eternally the atomic particle of the spirit whole, and he
remains the same atom eternally, without change. The theory of monism is
very difficult to apply in this case, because the individual soul is never
expected to become one homogeneously. After liberation from material
contamination, the atomic soul may prefer to remain as a spiritual spark in the
effulgent rays of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the intelligent souls



enter into the spiritual planets to associate with the Personality of Godhead.

The word sarva-gata (“all-pervading”) is significant because there is no
doubt that living entities are all over God’s creation. They live on the land, in
the water, in the air, within the earth and even within fire. The belief that
they are sterilized in fire is not acceptable, because it is clearly stated here that
the soul cannot be burned by fire. Therefore, there is no doubt that there are
living entities also in the sun planet with suitable bodies to live there. If the
sun globe is uninhabited, then the word sarva-gata—“living
everywhere”—becomes meaningless.

TEXT 25

WSWSWWSW I
amid W WW II QR ||

avyakto ’yam acihtyo ’yam
avikc‘tryo ’yam ucyate

tasmc‘td evam viditvaiham
hc‘mus’ocitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

avyaktah—invisible; ayam—this soul; acihtyah—inconceivable; ayam—this
soul; avikc‘wyah—unchangeable; ayam—this soul; ucyate—is said;
tasmc‘It—therefore; evam—like this; viditvc‘t—knowing it well; enam—this soul;
ha—do not; anus’ocitum—to lament; arhasi—you deserve.

TRANSLATION

It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable and immutable. Knowing
this, you should not grieve for the body.

PURPORT



As described previously, the magnitude of the soul is so small for our
material calculation that he cannot be seen even by the most powerful
microscope; therefore, he is invisible. As far as the soul’s existence is
concerned, no one can establish his existence experimentally beyond the proof
of s’mti, or Vedic wisdom. We have to accept this truth, because there is no
other source of understanding the existence of the soul, although it is a fact by
perception. There are many things we have to accept solely on grounds of
superior authority. No one can deny the existence of his father, based upon
the authority of his mother. There is no source of understanding the identity
of the father except by the authority of the mother. Similarly, there is no
source of understanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words,
the soul is inconceivable by human experimental knowledge. The soul is
consciousness and conscious—that also is the statement of the Vedas, and we
have to accept that. Unlike the bodily changes, there is no change in the soul.
As eternally unchangeable, the soul remains atomic in comparison to the
infinite Supreme Soul. The Supreme Soul is infinite, and the atomic soul is
infinitesimal. Therefore, the infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never
become equal to the infinite soul, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
This concept is repeated in the Vedas in different ways just to confirm the
stability of the conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary in
order that we understand the matter thoroughly, without error.

TEXT 26
aaﬁﬁﬁmﬁﬁeiarmﬁml
amﬁeinaﬁlﬁﬁﬁiﬁﬁgqﬁrmsu

atha caiham hitya—jc‘ttam
nityam vc‘t manyase mrtam
tathc‘tpi tvam mahc‘I-bc‘tho
haiham s’ocitum arhasi



SYNONYMS

atha—if, however; ca—also; enam—this soul; hitya-jc‘ttam—always born;
hityam—forever; Ua—either; manyase—you so think; mrtam—dead; tathd
api—still; tvam—you; mahc‘t—bc‘tho—O mighty-armed one; ha—never;
enam—about the soul; s’ocitum—to lament; arhasi—deserve.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you think that the soul [or the symptoms of life] is always born
and dies forever, you still have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.

PURPORT

There is always a class of philosophers, almost akin to the Buddhists, who do
not believe in the separate existence of the soul beyond the body. When Lord
Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, it appears that such philosophers existed, and
they were known as the lokc‘tyatikas and vaibhc‘tsikas. Such philosophers
maintain that life symptoms take place at a certain mature condition of
material combination. The modern material scientist and materialist
philosophers also think similarly. According to them, the body is a
combination of physical elements, and at a certain stage the life symptoms
develop by interaction of the physical and chemical elements. The science of
anthropology is based on this philosophy. Currently, many pseudo
religions—now becoming fashionable in America—are also adhering to this
philosophy, as well as to the nihilistic nondevotional Buddhist sects.

Even if Arjuna did not believe in the existence of the soul—as in the
vaibhasika philosophy—there would still have been no cause for lamentation.
No one laments the loss of a certain bulk of chemicals and stops discharging
his prescribed duty. On the other hand, in modern science and scientific
warfare, so many tons of chemicals are wasted for achieving Victory over the
enemy. According to the vaibhasika philosophy, the so-called soul or citmc't
vanishes along with the deterioration of the body. So, in any case, whether



Arjuna accepted the Vedic conclusion that there is an atomic soul or he did
not believe in the existence of the soul, he had no reason to lament. According
to this theory, since there are so many living entities generating out of matter
every moment, and so many of them are being vanquished every moment,
there is no need to grieve for such incidents. If there were no rebirth for the
soul, Arjuna had no reason to be afraid of being affected by sinful reactions
due to his killing his grandfather and teacher. But at the same time, Krsna
sarcastically addressed Arjuna as mahc‘t-bc‘thu, mighty-armed, because He, at
least, did not accept the theory of the vaibhasikas, which leaves aside the Vedic
wisdom. As a ksati'iya, Arjuna belonged to the Vedic culture, and it behooved
him to continue to follow its principles.

TEXT 27

Wﬁﬁﬁﬁéwwal
Wsﬁﬁeisﬁﬁenéﬁruwu

jatasya hi dhruvo mrtym
dhruvam jcmma mrtasya ca

tasmc‘td aparihc‘trye ’rthe

ha tvam s’ocitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

jatasya—of one who has taken his birth; hi—certainly; dhruvah—a fact;
mrtyuh—death; dhruvam—it is also a fact; jahma—birth; mrtasya—of the
dead; ca—also; tasmc‘It—therefore; aparihc‘wye—of that which is unavoidable;
arthe—in the matter; ha—do not; tvam—you; s’ocitum—to lament;
arhasi—deserve.

TRANSLATION

One Who has taken his birth is sure to die, and after death one is sure to
take birth again. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you



should not lament.

PURPORT

One has to take birth according to one’s activities of life. And after
finishing one term of activities, one has to die to take birth for the next. In
this way one is going through one cycle of birth and death after another
without liberation. This cycle of birth and death does not, however, support
unnecessary murder, slaughter and war. But at the same time, Violence and war
are inevitable factors in human society for keeping law and order.

The Battle of Kuruksetra, being the will of the Supreme, was an inevitable
event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of a ksati'iya. Why should he
be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of his relatives since he was discharging
his proper duty.7 He did not deserve to break the law, thereby becoming
subjected to the reactions of sinful acts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding
the discharge of his proper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his
relatives, and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path of
action.

TEXT 28

WWWWI
Wmmqﬁaaﬁiuwu

avyaktc‘tdihi thZtc‘mi
vyakta—madhyc‘mi bhc‘wata
avyakta—hidhahc‘my eva
tatra kc‘t paridevahc‘t

SYNONYMS

avyakta-c‘tdihi—in the beginning unmanifested; bhﬁtc'mi—all that are created;
vyakta—manifested; madhyc‘mi—in the middle; bhc‘wata—O descendant of
Bharata; avyakta—nonmanifested; hidhcmc‘mi—when vanquished; eva—it is all



like that; tatra—therefore; ka—what; paridevam‘t—lamentation.

TRANSLATION

All created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their
interim state, and unmanifest again When annihilated. So What need is there for
lamentation?

PURPORT

Accepting that there are two classes of philosophers, one believing in the
existence of the soul and the other not believing in the existence of the soul,
there is no cause for lamentation in either case. Nonbelievers in the existence
of the soul are called atheists by followers of Vedic wisdom. Yet even if, for
argument’s sake, we accept this atheistic theory, there is still no cause for
lamentation. Apart from the separate existence of the soul, the material
elements remain unmanifested before creation. From this subtle state of
nonmanifestation comes manifestation, just as from ether, air is generated;
from air, fire is generated; from fire, water is generated; and from water, earth
becomes manifested. From the earth, many varieties of manifestations take
place. Take, for example, a big skyscraper manifested from the earth. When it
is dismantled, the manifestation becomes again unmanifested and remains as
atoms in the ultimate stage. The law of conservation of energy remains, but in
course of time things are manifested and unmanifested—that is the difference.
Then what cause is there for lamentation either in the stage of manifestation
or in unmanifestation? Somehow or other, even in the unmanifested stage,
things are not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elements remain
unmanifested, and only in the middle are they manifested, and this does not
make any real material difference.

And if we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t that
these material bodies are perishable in due course of time (antavahta ime
dehc‘th) but that the soul is eternal (hityasyoktc‘th s’aririhah), then we must
remember always that the body is like a dress; therefore why lament the
changing of a dress.7 The material body has no factual existence in relation to



the eternal soul. It is something like a dream. In a dream we may think of
ﬂying in the sky, or sitting on a chariot as a king, but when we wake up we can
see that we are neither in the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom
encourages self-realization on the basis of the nonexistence of the material
body. Therefore, in either case, whether one believes in the existence of the
soul or one does not believe in the existence of the soul, there is no cause for
lamentation for loss of the body.

TEXT 29

311W 65%—
mm 6% 2W: I
wadaﬁaw: 1PM?

WQEHQHWIIQQII

cis’carya—vat pas’yati kas’cid eham
cis’carya—vad vadati tathaiva cc‘myah

cis’carya—Uac caiham ahyah s’moti
s’mtvc‘tpy eham veda ha caiva kas’cit

SYNONYMS

cis’carya—vat—as amazing; pas’yati—sees; kas’cit—someone; enam—this soul;
cis’carya—vat—as amazing; vadati—speaks of; tathc‘I—thus; eva—certainly;
ca—also; ahyah—another; cis’carya—vat—similarly amazing; ca—also;
enam—this soul; anyah—another; s’rhoti—hears of; s’mtvc‘L—having heard;
api—even; enam—this soul; veda—knows; ha—never; ca—and;
eva—certainly; kas’cit—someone.

TRANSLATION

Some look on the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and some
hear of him as amazing, While others, even after hearing about him, cannot



understand him at all.

PURPORT

Since Gitopcmisad is largely based on the principles of the Upcmisads, it is
not surprising to also find this passage in the Katha Upam'gaa (1.2.7):

s’ravahayc‘tpi bahubhir yo ha labhyah

s’rhvahto ’pi bahavo yam ha vidyuh
cis’caryo vaktc‘t kus’alo ’sya labdhc‘t
cis’caryo ’sya jhc‘ttc‘t kus’alc‘mus’istah

The fact that the atomic soul is within the body of a gigantic animal, in the
body of a gigantic banyan tree, and also in the microbic germs, millions and
billions of which occupy only an inch of space, is certainly very amazing. Men
with a poor fund of knowledge and men who are not austere cannot
understand the wonders of the individual atomic spark of spirit, even though it
is explained by the greatest authority of knowledge, who imparted lessons even
to Brahma, the first living being in the universe. Owing to a gross material
conception of things, most men in this age cannot imagine how such a small
particle can become both so great and so small. 80 men look at the soul proper
as wonderful either by constitution or by description. Illusioned by the
material energy, people are so engrossed in subject matters for sense
gratification that they have very little time to understand the question of
self-understanding, even though it is a fact that without this
self-understanding all activities result in ultimate defeat in the struggle for
existence. Perhaps they have no idea that one must think of the soul, and thus
make a solution to the material miseries.

Some people who are inclined to hear about the soul may be attending
lectures, in good association, but sometimes, owing to ignorance, they are
misguided by acceptance of the Supersoul and the atomic soul as one without
distinction of magnitude. It is very difficult to find a man who perfectly
understands the position of the Supersoul, the atomic soul, their respective
functions and relationships and all other major and minor details. And it is



still more difficult to find a man who has actually derived full benefit from
knowledge of the soul, and who is able to describe the position of the soul in
different aspects. But if, somehow or other, one is able to understand the
subject matter of the soul, then one’s life is successful.

The easiest process for understanding the subject matter of self, however, is
to accept the statements of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t spoken by the greatest authority,
Lord Krsna, without being deviated by other theories. But it also requires a
great deal of penance and sacrifice, either in this life or in the previous ones,
before one is able to accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Krsna can, however, be known as such by the causeless mercy of the pure
devotee and by no other way.

TEXT 30

aﬁﬁanaw‘rssiéﬁaaiamI
ammafﬁriﬁﬁﬁeisﬁﬁgqﬁﬁrusou

dehi hityam avadhyo ’yam
dehe sarvasya bhc‘wata
tasmdt sarvc‘mi thZtc‘mi
ha tvam s’ocitum arhasi

SYNONYMS

dehi—the owner of the material body; hityam—eternally; avadhyah—cannot
be killed; ayam—this soul; dehe—in the body; sarvasya—of everyone;
bhc‘wata—O descendant of Bharata; tasmc‘It—therefore; sarvc‘mi—all;
thZtc‘mi—living entities (that are born); ha—never; tvam—you; s’ocitum—to
lament; arhasi—deserve.

TRANSLATION

O descendant of Bharata, he Who dwells in the body can never be slain.
Therefore you need not grieve for any living being.



PURPORT

The Lord now concludes the chapter of instruction on the immutable spirit
soul. In describing the immortal soul in various ways, Lord Krsna establishes
that the soul is immortal and the body is temporary. Therefore Arjuna as a
ksati'iya should not abandon his duty out of fear that his grandfather and
teacher—Bhisma and Drona—will die in the battle. On the authority of Sri
Krsna, one has to believe that there is a soul different from the material body,
not that there is no such thing as soul, or that living symptoms develop at a
certain stage of material maturity resulting from the interaction of chemicals.
Though the soul is immortal, Violence is not encouraged, but at the time of war
it is not discouraged when there is actual need for it. That need must be
justified in terms of the sanction of the Lord, and not capriciously.

TEXT 31

Waﬁaﬁmﬁqﬁﬁw
mwswmﬁﬁaﬁuseu

sva—dharmam api cc‘weksya
ha vikampitum arhasi
dharmyc‘td dhi yuddhc‘tc chreyo ’hyat
ksatriyasya ha vidyate

SYNONYMS

sva—dharmam—one’s own religious principles; api—also; ca—indeed;
aveksya—considering; ha—never; Uikampitum—to hesitate; arhasi—you
deserve; dharmyc'tt—for religious principles; hi—indeed; yuddhc‘tt—than
fighting; s’reyah—better engagement; anyat—any other; ksatriyasya—of the
ksatriya; ha—does not; vidyate—exist.



TRANSLATION

Considering your specific duty as a ksatriya, you should know that there is
no better engagement for you than fighting on religious principles; and so there
is no need for hesitation.

PURPORT

Out of the four orders of social administration, the second order, for the
matter of good administration, is called ksati'iya. Ksat means hurt. One who
gives protection from harm is called ksati'iya (trc‘tyate—to give protection). The
ksatriyas are trained for killing in the forest. A ksatriya would go into the
forest and challenge a tiger face to face and fight with the tiger with his sword.
When the tiger was killed, it would be offered the royal order of cremation.
This system has been followed even up to the present day by the ksati'iya kings
of Jaipur state. The ksatriyas are specially trained for challenging and killing
because religious Violence is sometimes a necessary factor. Therefore, ksati'iyas
are never meant for accepting directly the order of sannyc‘tsa, or renunciation.
Nonviolence in politics may be a diplomacy, but it is never a factor or
principle. In the religious law books it is stated:

ahavesu mitho ’hyortyam
jighc‘tmsahto mahi—ksitah
yuddhamc‘mc‘th param s’aktyci
svargam yc‘mty aparcih—mukhc‘th

yajﬁesu pas’avo brahmcm

hahycmte satatam dvijaih
samskrtc‘th kila mantrais’ ca

te ’pi svargam avc‘tpnuvan

“In the battlefield, a king or ksati'iya, while fighting another king envious of
him, is eligible for achieving heavenly planets after death, as the brc‘thmahas
also attain the heavenly planets by sacrificing animals in the sacrificial fire.”



Therefore, killing on the battlefield on religious principles and killing animals
in the sacrificial fire are not at all considered to be acts of Violence, because
everyone is benefited by the religious principles involved. The animal
sacrificed gets a human life immediately without undergoing the gradual
evolutionary process from one form to another, and the ksati'iyas killed on the
battlefield also attain the heavenly planets as do the brc‘thmahas who attain
them by offering sacrifice.

There are two kinds of sva-dharmas, specific duties. As long as one is not
liberated, one has to perform the duties of his particular body in accordance
with religious principles in order to achieve liberation. When one is liberated,
one’s sva-dharma—specific duty—becomes spiritual and is not in the material
bodily concept. In the bodily conception of life there are specific duties for the
brc‘thmahas and ksatriyas respectively, and such duties are unavoidable.
Sva-dharma is ordained by the Lord, and this will be clarified in the Fourth
Chapter. On the bodily plane sva-dharma is called vamc‘ts’rama—dharma, or
man’s steppingstone for spiritual understanding. Human civilization begins
from the stage of vamc'ts’mma-dhai‘ma, or specific duties in terms of the specific
modes of nature of the body obtained. Discharging one’s specific duty in any
field of action in accordance with the orders of higher authorities serves to
elevate one to a higher status of life.

TEXT 32

mWWI
Elma: 53W: mdwﬁam‘imu 3? ||

yadrcchayc‘t copapahham
svarga—dvc‘wam apc‘wrtam
sukhihah ksatriyc‘th pc‘mha
labhcmte yuddham idrs’am

SYNONYMS



yadrcchayc‘t—by its own accord; ca—also; upapahham—arrived at; svarga—of
the heavenly planets; dvc‘tmm—door; apc‘wrtam—wide open; sukhinah—very
happy; ksatriyc'th—the members of the royal order; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha;
labhcmte—do achieve; yuddham—war; idrs’am—like this.

TRANSLATION

O Partha, happy are the ksatriyas to Whom such fighting opportunities come
unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.

PURPORT

As supreme teacher of the world, Lord Krsna condemns the attitude of
Arjuna, who said, “I do not find any good in this fighting. It will cause
perpetual habitation in hell.” Such statements by Arjuna were due to
ignorance only. He wanted to become nonviolent in the discharge of his
specific duty. For a ksati'iya to be on the battlefield and to become nonviolent
is the philosophy of fools. In the Paras’aTa-smrti, or religious codes made by
Parasara, the great sage and father of Vyasadeva, it is stated:

ksatriyo hi prajc‘t rakscm
s’astra—pc‘mih pradahdayah
hirjitya para-sainyc‘tdi
ksitim dharmeha palayet

“The ksatriya’s duty is to protect the citizens from all kinds of difficulties,
and for that reason he has to apply Violence in suitable cases for law and order.
Therefore he has to conquer the soldiers of inimical kings, and thus, with
religious principles, he should rule over the world.”

Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting. If he
should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if he should die
in the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planets, whose doors were
wide open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit in either case.

TEXT 33



aaﬁafﬁlﬁuﬁasﬁﬁaxﬁwﬁn
maﬁﬁﬁfaﬁaqﬁwﬁiuasu

atha cet tvam imam dharmyam
sahgrc‘tmam ha karisyasi
tatah sva—dharmam kirtim ca
hitvc‘t pdpam avapsyasi

SYNONYMS

atha—therefore; cet—if; tvam—you; imam—this; dharmyam—as a religious
duty; sahgrc‘tmam—fighting; ha—do not; karisyasi—perform; tatah—then;
sva-dharmam—your religious duty; kirtim—reputation; ca—also;
hitvc‘I—losing; papam—sinful reaction; avc‘tpsyasi—will gain.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you do not perform your religious duty of fighting, then you
Will certainly incur sins for neglecting your duties and thus lose your reputation
as a fighter.

PURPORT

Arjuna was a famous fighter, and he attained fame by fighting many great
demigods, including even Lord Siva. After fighting and defeating Lord Siva in
the dress of a hunter, Arjuna pleased the lord and received as a reward a
weapon called pcis’upata-astm. Everyone knew that he was a great warrior.
Even Dronacarya gave him benedictions and awarded him the special weapon
by which he could kill even his teacher. 80 he was credited with so many
military certificates from many authorities, including his adopted father Indra,
the heavenly king. But if he abandoned the battle, not only would he neglect
his specific duty as a ksati'iya, but he would lose all his fame and good name
and thus prepare his royal road to hell. In other words, he would go to hell, not



by fighting, but by withdrawing from battle.

TEXT 34

WWW$W§SWI
WWﬁﬁmﬁrﬁaﬁuseu

akirtim cdpi thZtc‘mi
kathayisycmti te ’vyayc‘tm
sambhc‘witasya cc‘tkirtir
marahc‘td atiricyate

SYNONYMS

akirtim—infamy; ca—also; api—over and above; bhﬁtc'mi—all people;
kathayisyahti—will speak; te—of you; avyayc‘tm—forever; sambhc‘witasya—for a
respectable man; ca—also; akirtih—ill fame; marahc‘tt—than death;
atiricyate—becomes more.

TRANSLATION

People Will always speak of your infamy, and for a respectable person,
dishonor is worse than death.

PURPORT

Both as friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Krsna now gives His final
judgment regarding Arjuna’s refusal to fight. The Lord says, “Arjuna, if you
leave the battlefield before the battle even begins, people will call you a
coward. And if you think that people may call you bad names but that you will
save your life by fleeing the battlefield, then My advice is that you’d do better
to die in the battle. For a respectable man like you, ill fame is worse than
death. 80, you should not flee for fear of your life; better to die in the battle.
That will save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and from losing



your prestige in society.”
So, the final judgment of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battle and
not withdraw.

TEXT 35
WWWWWH
Waawﬁiﬂmﬁmu 31 ||

bhaycid rancid uparatam
mamsyahte tvc‘m’t mahc‘I—rathc‘th
yesc‘tm ca tvam bahu—mato
bhﬁtvc‘t yc‘tsyasi laghavam

SYNONYMS

bhayc‘tt—out of fear; rahat—from the battlefield; uparatam—ceased;
mamsyahte—they will consider; tvc‘tm—you; mahc‘I—rathc‘th—the great generals;
yesc‘tm—for whom; ca—also; tvam—you; bahu—matah—in great estimation;
bhﬁtvc‘t—having been; yc‘tsyasi—you will go; laghavam—decreased in value.

TRANSLATION

The great generals Who have highly esteemed your name and fame Will think
that you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thus they Will consider
you insignificant.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: “Do not think that the
great generals like Duryodhana, Karna, and other contemporaries will think
that you have left the battlefield out of compassion for your brothers and
grandfather. They will think that you have left out of fear for your life. And
thus their high estimation of your personality will go to hell.”



TEXT 36

Wammzl
ﬁmamﬁaa‘rgzaaigmuasu

avc‘tcya—vc‘tdams’ ca bahﬁh
vadisyahti tavc‘thitc‘th
hihdahtas tava scimarthyam
tato duhkhataram nu kim

SYNONYMS

avc‘tcya—unkind; vc‘tdc‘m—fabricated words; ca—also; bahﬁh—many;
vadisyahti—will say; tava—your; ahitc‘Ih—enemies; hihdcmtah—while vilifying;
tava—your; sdmarthyam—ability; tatah—than that; duhkha—taram—more
painful; hu—of course; kim—what is there.

TRANSLATION

Your enemies Will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your
ability. What could be more painful for you?

PURPORT

Lord Krsna was astonished in the beginning at Arjuna’s uncalled-for plea
for compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting the non-Aryans.
Now in so many words, He has proved His statements against Arjuna’s
so-called compassion.

TEXT 37

Eﬁiaimﬁraﬁﬁlaiaiﬁaﬁnﬁm



Weﬁﬁawmwuseu

hato vc‘t prc‘tpsyasi svargam
jitvc‘t vc‘t bhoksyase mahim
tasmc‘td uttistha kauhteya
yuddhc‘tya krta-his’cayah

SYNONYMS

hatah—being killed; vc‘t—either; prc‘tpsyasi—you gain; svargam—the heavenly
kingdom; jitvc‘I—by conquering; vc‘t—or; bhoksyase—you enjoy; mahim—the
world; tasmc‘It—therefore; uttistha—get up; kauhteya—O son of Kunti;
yuddhc‘tya—to fight; krta—determined; his’cayah—in certainty.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Kunti, either you Will be killed on the battlefield and attain the
heavenly planets, or you Will conquer and enjoy the earthly kingdom.
Therefore, get up With determination and fight.

PURPORT

Even though there was no certainty of Victory for Arjuna’s side, he still had
to fight; for, even being killed there, he could be elevated into the heavenly
planets.

TEXT 38

mﬁaﬁwwwﬁmmﬁh
aﬁmwﬁdwﬁruﬁu

sukha-duhkhe same krtvd
labhc‘tlc‘tbhau jayajayau
tato yuddhc‘tya yujyasva



haivam pdpam avapsyasi

SYNONYMS

sukha—happiness; duhkhe—and distress; same—in equanimity; krtvc‘I—doing
so; labha—alc‘tbhau—both profit and loss; jaya-ajayau—both Victory and defeat;
tatah—thereafter; yuddhc‘tya—for the sake of fighting; yujyasva—engage
(fight); ha—never; evam—in this way; papam—sinful reaction;
avdpsyasi—you will gain.

TRANSLATION

Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, Without considering happiness or
distress, loss or gain, Victory or defeat—and by so doing you shall never incur
sin.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna now directly says that Arjuna should fight for the sake of
fighting because He desires the battle. There is no consideration of happiness
or distress, profit or gain, Victory or defeat in the activities of Krsna
consciousness. That everything should be performed for the sake of Krsna is
transcendental consciousness; so there is no reaction to material activities. He
who acts for his own sense gratification, either in goodness or in passion, is
subject to the reaction, good or bad. But he who has completely surrendered
himself in the activities of Krsna consciousness is no longer obliged to anyone,
nor is he a debtor to anyone, as one is in the ordinary course of activities. It is
said:

devarsi—bhﬁtdpta—hmc‘tm pitfhc‘tm
ha kihkaro miyam mi ca rc‘tjcm
sarvc‘ttmahc‘t yah saraham sarahyam
gato mukuhdam parihrtya kartam

“Anyone who has completely surrendered unto Krsna, Mukunda, giving up
all other duties, is no longer a debtor, nor is he obliged to anyone—not the



demigods, nor the sages, nor the people in general, nor kinsmen, nor humanity,
nor forefathers.” (Bbég. 11.5.41) That is the indirect hint given by Krsna to
Arjuna in this verse, and the matter will be more clearly explained in the
following verses.

TEXT 39

mﬁsmaﬁﬁqﬁﬁﬁaniml
wﬁwqﬁmmuasu

esc‘t te ’bhihitc‘t sc‘mkhye
buddhir yoge tv imam s’rhu
buddhyc‘t yukto yayc‘t pc‘wtha
karma—bahdham prahc‘tsyasi

SYNONYMS

esc'I—all this; te—unto you; abhihitc‘t—described; sc'mkhye—by analytical study;
buddhih—intelligence; yoge—in work without fruitive result; tu—but;
imc‘tm—this; s’mu—just hear; buddhyc‘t—by intelligence; yuktah—dovetailed;
yayc‘t—by which; pc‘mha—O son of Prtha; karma—bahdham—bondage of
reaction; prahc‘tsyasi—you can be released from.

TRANSLATION

Thus far I have described this knowledge to you through analytical study.
Now listen as I explain it in terms of working Without fruitive results. 0 son of
Prtha, When you act in such knowledge you can free yourself from the bondage
of works.

PURPORT

According to the Nimkti, or the Vedic dictionary, sahkhyc't means that
which describes things in detail, and sc'mkhya refers to that philosophy which



describes the real nature of the soul. And yoga involves controlling the senses.
Arjuna’s proposal not to fight was based on sense gratification. Forgetting his
prime duty, he wanted to cease fighting, because he thought that by not killing
his relatives and kinsmen he would be happier than by enjoying the kingdom
after conquering his cousins and brothers, the sons of Dhrtarastra. In both
ways, the basic principles were for sense gratification. Happiness derived from
conquering them and happiness derived by seeing kinsmen alive are both on
the basis of personal sense gratification, even at a sacrifice of wisdom and duty.
Krsna, therefore, wanted to explain to Arjuna that by killing the body of his
grandfather he would not be killing the soul proper, and He explained that all
individual persons, including the Lord Himself, are eternal individuals; they
were individuals in the past, they are individuals in the present, and they will
continue to remain individuals in the future, because all of us are individual
souls eternally. We simply change our bodily dress in different manners, but
actually we keep our individuality even after liberation from the bondage of
material dress. An analytical study of the soul and the body has been very
graphically explained by Lord Krsna. And this descriptive knowledge of the
soul and the body from different angles of Vision has been described here as
Sankhya, in terms of the Nimkti dictionary. This Sankhya has nothing to do
with Sankhya philosophy of the atheist Kapila. Long before the imposter
Kapila’s Sankhya, the Sankhya philosophy was expounded in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam by the true Lord Kapila, the incarnation of Lord Krsna,
who explained it to His mother, Devahfiti. It is clearly explained by Him that
the pumsa, or the Supreme Lord, is active and that He creates by looking over
the prakrti. This is accepted in the Vedas and in the Gita. The description in
the Vedas indicates that the Lord glanced over the prakrti, or nature, and
impregnated it with atomic individual souls. All these individuals are working
in the material world for sense gratification, and under the spell of material
energy they are thinking of being enjoyers. This mentality is dragged to the
last point of liberation when the living entity wants to become one with the
Lord. This is the last snare of mciyc't, or sense gratificatory illusion, and it is
only after many, many births of such sense gratificatory activities that a great
soul surrenders unto Vasudeva, Lord Krsna, thereby fulfilling the search after



the ultimate truth.

Arjuna has already accepted Krsna as his spiritual master by surrendering
himself unto Him: s’isyas te ’ham s’c‘tdhi mam tvc‘m’t prapahham. Consequently,
Krsna will now tell him about the working process in buddhi-yoga, or
karma-yoga, or in other words, the practice of devotional service only for the
sense gratification of the Lord. This buddhi-yoga is clearly explained in
Chapter Ten, verse ten, as being direct communion with the Lord, who is
sitting as Paramatma in everyone’s heart. But such communion does not take
place without devotional service. One who is therefore situated in devotional
or transcendental loving service to the Lord, or, in other words, in Krsna
consciousness, attains to this stage of buddhi-yoga by the special grace of the
Lord. The Lord says, therefore, that only to those who are always engaged in
devotional service out of transcendental love does He award the pure
knowledge of devotion in love. In that way the devotee can reach Him easily
in the ever-blissful kingdom of God.

Thus the buddhi-yoga mentioned in this verse is the devotional service of
the Lord, and the word Sankhya mentioned herein has nothing to do with the
atheistic scihkhya-yoga enunciated by the imposter Kapila. One should not,
therefore, misunderstand that the scihkhya-yoga mentioned herein has any
connection with the atheistic Sankhya. Nor did that philosophy have any
inﬂuence during that time; nor would Lord Krsna care to mention such godless
philosophical speculations. Real Sankhya philosophy is described by Lord
Kapila in the Srimad—Bhagavatam, but even that Sankhya has nothing to do
with the current topics. Here, Sankhya means analytical description of the
body and the soul. Lord Krsna made an analytical description of the soul just
to bring Arjuna to the point of buddhi-yoga, or bhakti—yoga. Therefore, Lord
Krsna’s Sankhya and Lord Kapila’s Sankhya, as described in the Bhagavatam,
are one and the same. They are all bhakti-yoga. Lord Krsna Said, therefore,
that only the less intelligent class of men make a distinction between
scihkhya—yoga and bhakti-yoga (sahkhya—yogau prthag balah pravadahti ha
panditdh).

Of course, atheistic scihkhya—yoga has nothing to do with bhakti—yoga, yet
the unintelligent claim that the atheistic scihkhya-yoga is referred to in the



Bhagavad—gitc‘t.

One should therefore understand that buddhi-yoga means to work in Krsna
consciousness, in the full bliss and knowledge of devotional service. One who
works for the satisfaction of the Lord only, however difficult such work may
be, is working under the principles of buddhi-yoga and finds himself always in
transcendental bliss. By such transcendental engagement, one achieves all
transcendental understanding automatically, by the grace of the Lord, and
thus his liberation is complete in itself, without his making extraneous
endeavors to acquire knowledge. There is much difference between work in
Krsna consciousness and work for fruitive results, especially in the matter of
sense gratification for achieving results in terms of family or material
happiness. Buddhi-yoga is therefore the transcendental quality of the work that
we perform.

TEXT 40

Wﬁewﬁﬁﬁaﬁl
WWWWWMMI

hehabhikrama—hc‘ts’o ’sti

pratyavc‘tyo ha vidyate
sv—alpam apy asya dharmasya

trc‘tyate mahato bhaydt

SYNONYMS
ha—there is not; iha—in this yoga; abhikrama—in endeavoring; mis’ah—loss;
asti—there is; pratyavc‘tyah—diminution; ha—never; vidyate—there is;
su-alpam—a little; api—although; asya—of this; dharmasya—occupation;
trc‘tyate—releases; mahatah—from very great; bhayc‘tt—danger.
TRANSLATION

In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little advancement on



this path can protect one from the most dangerous type of fear.

PURPORT

Activity in Krsna consciousness, or acting for the benefit of Krsna without
expectation of sense gratification, is the highest transcendental quality of
work. Even a small beginning of such activity finds no impediment, nor can
that small beginning be lost at any stage. Any work begun on the material
plane has to be completed, otherwise the whole attempt becomes a failure. But
any work begun in Krsna consciousness has a permanent effect, even though
not finished. The performer of such work is therefore not at a loss even if his
work in Krsna consciousness is incomplete. One percent done in Krsna
consciousness bears permanent results, so that the next beginning is from the
point of two percent, whereas in material activity without a hundred percent
success there is no profit. Ajamila performed his duty in some percentage of
Krsna consciousness, but the result he enjoyed at the end was a hundred
percent, by the grace of the Lord. There is a nice verse in this connection in

grimad-Bbéga V3 tam ( 1.5.17) :

tyaktvc‘t sva—dharmam carahc‘tmbujam hater
bhajcmh apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vc‘tbhadram abhﬁd amusya kim
k0 Udrtha dpto ’bhajatc‘tm sva—dharmatah

“If someone gives up his occupational duties and works in Krsna
consciousness and then falls down on account of not completing his work,
what loss is there on his part? And what can one gain if one performs his
material activities perfectly?” Or, as the Christians say, “What profiteth a man
if he gain the whole world yet suffers the loss of his eternal soul?”

Material activities and their results end with the body. But work in Krsna
consciousness carries a person again to Krsna consciousness, even after the loss
of the body. At least one is sure to have a chance in the next life of being born
again as a human being, either in the family of a great cultured brc‘thmaha or in
a rich aristocratic family that will give one a further chance for elevation.



That is the unique quality of work done in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 41

vyavasc‘tyc‘ttmikc‘t buddhir
ekeha kmu—hahdaha
bahu-s’c‘tkhc‘t hy cmahtc‘ts’ ca
buddhayo ’vyavasc‘tyihc‘tm

SYNONYMS

vyavasc'tya-c'ttmikc't—resolute in Krsna consciousness; buddhih—intelligence;
ekc‘I—only one; iha—in this world; kmu—hahdaha—O beloved child of the
Kurus; bahu-s’c‘tkhc‘th—having various branches; hi—indeed;
ahahtc‘th—unlimited; ca—also; buddhayah—intelligence; avyavasc‘tymc‘tm—of
those who are not in Krsna consciousness.

TRANSLATION

Those Who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one. 0
beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those Who are irresolute is
many-branched.

PURPORT

A strong faith that by Krsna consciousness one will be elevated to the
highest perfection of life is called vyavasc'tyc'ttmikc't intelligence. The
Caitanya—caritc‘tmrta (Madhya 22.62) states:

’s’raddhd’—s’abde——Uis’vc‘tsa kahe sudrdha his’caya
krsne bhakti kaile sarva—karma krta haya



Faith means unﬂinching trust in something sublime. When one is engaged
in the duties of Krsna consciousness, he need not act in relationship to the
material world with obligations to family traditions, humanity, or nationality.
Fruitive activities are the engagements of one’s reactions from past good or bad
deeds. When one is awake in Krsna consciousness, he need no longer endeavor
for good results in his activities. When one is situated in Krsna consciousness,
all activities are on the absolute plane, for they are no longer subject to
dualities like good and bad. The highest perfection of Krsna consciousness is
renunciation of the material conception of life. This state is automatically
achieved by progressive Krsna consciousness.

The resolute purpose of a person in Krsna consciousness is based on
knowledge. Vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahc‘ttmc‘t su—dmlabhah: a person in Krsna
consciousness is the rare good soul who knows perfectly that Vasudeva, or
Krsna, is the root of all manifested causes. As by watering the root of a tree
one automatically distributes water to the leaves and branches, so by acting in
Krsna consciousness one can render the highest service to everyone—namely
self, family, society, country, humanity, etc. If Krsna is satisfied by one’s
actions, then everyone will be satisfied.

Service in Krsna consciousness is, however, best practiced under the able
guidance of a spiritual master who is a bona fide representative of Krsna, who
knows the nature of the student and who can guide him to act in Krsna
consciousness. As such, to be well versed in Krsna consciousness one has to act
firmly and obey the representative of Krsna, and one should accept the
instruction of the bona fide spiritual master as one’s mission in life. Srila
Vis’vanatha Cakravarti Thakura instructs us, in his famous prayers for the
spiritual master, as follows:

yasya prasc‘tdad bhagavat—prasc‘tdo
yasyc‘tprascidah ha gatih kuto ’pi
dhyc‘tyah stuvams tasya yas’as tri-scmdhyam
vahde gmoh s’ri—carahc‘travihdam

“By satisfaction of the spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead becomes satisfied. And by not satisfying the spiritual master, there is



no chance of being promoted to the plane of Krsna consciousness. I should,
therefore, meditate and pray for his mercy three times a day, and offer my
respectful obeisances unto him, my spiritual master.”

The whole process, however, depends on perfect knowledge of the soul
beyond the conception of the body—not theoretically but practically, when
there is no longer a chance for sense gratification manifested in fruitive
activities. One who is not firmly fixed in mind is diverted by various types of
fruitive acts.

TEXTS 42—43
mfP-Inf 118W Bret WW: I
amaze": mquaa'E-I‘iﬁraﬁaz || 8? H
W: W WWI
WW ﬁsﬁwﬁi me || 83 ||

yam imam puspitc‘tm vacam
pravadcmty avipas’citah
veda—vc‘tda-ratc‘th pc‘wtha
hc‘myad astiti Uadmah

kamatmc‘mah svarga—parc‘t
jahma—karma—phala-pradam
kriyd—vis’esa—bahulc‘tm
bhogais’varya—gatim prati

SYNONYMS

yam imc‘tm—all these; puspitc‘tm—ﬂowery; vacam—words; pravadahti—say;
avipas’citah—men with a poor fund of knowledge; veda—vc‘tda—ratc‘th—supposed
followers of the Vedas; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha; ha—never; anyat—anything
else; asti—there is; iti—thus; Uadmah—the advocates;
kama—dtmc‘mah—desirous of sense gratification; svarga-parc‘th—aiming to
achieve heavenly planets; jcmma—karma—phala—pradam—resulting in good birth



and other fruitive reactions; kriyc‘t-Uis’esa—pompous ceremonies;
bahulc‘tm—various; bhoga—in sense enjoyment; ais’varya—and opulence;
gatim—progress; prati—towards.

TRANSLATION

Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of the
Vedas, Which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to heavenly
planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being desirous of sense
gratification and opulent life, they say that there is nothing more than this.

PURPORT

People in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance they
are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in the karma-kc‘mda
portions of the Vedas. They do not want anything more than sense
gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wine and women are
available and material opulence is very common. In the Vedas many sacrifices
are recommended for elevation to the heavenly planets, especially the
jyotistoma sacrifices. In fact, it is stated that anyone desiring elevation to
heavenly planets must perform these sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of
knowledge think that this is the whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very
difficult for such inexperienced persons to be situated in the determined
action of Krsna consciousness. As fools are attached to the ﬂowers of
poisonous trees without knowing the results of such attractions, unenlightened
men are similarly attracted by such heavenly opulence and the sense
enjoyment thereof.

In the karma—kc‘mda section of the Vedas it is said, apdma somam amrtc‘t
abhﬁma and aksayyam ha vai cc‘ttmmasya—yc‘tjmah sukrtam bhavati. In other
words, those who perform the four-month penances become eligible to drink
the soma-Tasa beverages to become immortal and happy forever. Even on this
earth some are very eager to have soma-Tasa to become strong and fit to enjoy
sense gratifications. Such persons have no faith in liberation from material
bondage, and they are very much attached to the pompous ceremonies of



Vedic sacrifices. They are generally sensual, and they do not want anything
other than the heavenly pleasures of life. It is understood that there are
gardens called Nandana-kanana in which there is good opportunity for
association with angelic, beautiful women and having a profuse supply of
soma-Tasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainly sensual; therefore there are
those who are purely attached to such material, temporary happiness, as lords
of the material world.

TEXT 44

ﬁmmmﬁml
mezmreﬁﬁﬁtﬁuﬁu 88 ||

bhogais’varya—prasaktcim‘tm
tayc‘tpahrta—cetasc‘tm
vyavasc‘tyc‘ttmikc‘t buddhih
samadhau ha vidhiyate

SYNONYMS

bhoga—to material enjoyment; ais’varya—and opulence; prasaktc‘mc‘tm—for
those who are attached; tayc‘t—by such things; apahrta—cetasc‘tm—bewildered in
mind; vyavasc‘tya—c‘ttmikc‘t—fixed in determination; buddhih—devotional service
to the Lord; samadhau—in the controlled mind; ha—never; vidhiyate—does
take place.

TRANSLATION

In the minds of those Who are too attached to sense enjoyment and material
opulence, and Who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination for
devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place.

PURPORT



Samadhi means “fixed mind.” The Vedic dictionary, the Nimkti, says,
samyag adhiyate ’smihh citma-tattva—yc‘tthc‘ttmyam: “When the mind is fixed for
understanding the self, it is said to be in samadhi. ” Samadhi is never possible
for persons interested in material sense enjoyment, nor for those who are
bewildered by such temporary things. They are more or less condemned by the
process of material energy.

TEXT 45

WWQEIWWI
ﬁﬁ—‘g’rﬁaar—oleiiﬁa‘iwanatﬁqaﬁlleaII

trai—guhya—Uisayc‘t vedc‘t
histrai—guhyo bhavc‘wjuha
hirdvahdvo hitya—sattva-stho
hiryoga—ksema citmavc‘m

SYNONYMS

trai-guhya—pertaining to the three modes of material nature; Visayah—on the
subject matter; vedah—Vedic literatures; histrai-guhyah—transcendental to
the three modes of material nature; bhaUa—be; arjuha—O Arjuna;
hirdvahdvah—without duality; hitya—sattva—sthah—in a pure state of spiritual
existence; hiryoga-ksemah—free from ideas of gain and protection;
citma—vc‘m—established in the self.

TRANSLATION

The Vedas deal mainly With the subject of the three modes of material
nature. 0 Arjuna, become transcendental to these three modes. Be free from all
dualities and from all anxieties for gain and safety, and be established in the

self.



PURPORT

All material activities involve actions and reactions in the three modes of
material nature. They are meant for fruitive results, which cause bondage in
the material world. The Vedas deal mostly with fruitive activities to gradually
elevate the general public from the field of sense gratification to a position on
the transcendental plane. Arjuna, as a student and friend of Lord Krsna, is
advised to raise himself to the transcendental position of Vedc'mta philosophy
where, in the beginning, there is brahma-jijﬁc‘tsc‘t, or questions on the supreme
transcendence. All the living entities who are in the material world are
struggling very hard for existence. For them the Lord, after creation of the
material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how to live and get rid of the
material entanglement. When the activities for sense gratification, namely the
karma-kc‘mda chapter, are finished, then the chance for spiritual realization is
offered in the form of the Upcmisads, which are part of different Vedas, as the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t is a part of the fifth Veda, namely the Mahabharata. The
Upcmisads mark the beginning of transcendental life.

As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions in the
material modes. One has to learn tolerance in the face of dualities such as
happiness and distress, or cold and warmth, and by tolerating such dualities
become free from anxieties regarding gain and loss. This transcendental
position is achieved in full Krsna consciousness when one is fully dependent
on the good will of Krsna.

TEXT 46

Wﬁﬁﬁﬁéﬁzmﬁl
aﬁmﬁgaﬁgmmzuesu

yc‘wc‘m artha udapc‘me
sarvatah samplutodake
tc‘wc‘m sarvesu vedesu



brc‘thmahasya vijcihatah

SYNONYMS

yc‘wc‘m—all that; arthah—is meant; uda—pc‘me—in a well of water; sarvatah—in
all respects; sampluta-udake—in a great reservoir of water; tc'wc'm—similarly;
sarvesu—in all; vedesu—Vedic literatures; brahmahasya—of the man who
knows the Supreme Brahman; Uijc'matah—who is in complete knowledge.

TRANSLATION

All purposes served by a small well can at once be served by a great reservoir
of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedas can be served to one Who
knows the purpose behind them.

PURPORT

The rituals and sacrifices mentioned in the karma-kc‘mda division of the
Vedic literature are meant to encourage gradual development of
self-realization. And the purpose of self-realization is clearly stated in the
Fifteenth Chapter of the Bbagavad—gité (15.15): the purpose of studying the
Vedas is to know Lord Krsna, the primeval cause of everything. 80,
self-realization means understanding Krsna and one’s eternal relationship with
Him. The relationship of the living entities with Krsna is also mentioned in
the Fifteenth Chapter of Bbagavad—gité (15.7). The living entities are parts and
parcels of Krsna; therefore, revival of Krsna consciousness by the individual
living entity is the highest perfectional stage of Vedic knowledge. This is
confirmed in the grimad-Bbégavatam (3.33.7) as follows:

aho bata s’va-paco ’to gariyc‘m
yaj—jihvc‘tgre vartate hama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnm ciryc‘t
brahmc‘mﬁcm hama gmahti ye te

“O my Lord, a person who is chanting Your holy name, although born of a



low family like that of a caudala [dog-eater], is situated on the highest platform
of self-realization. Such a person must have performed all kinds of penances
and sacrifices according to Vedic rituals and studied the Vedic literatures
many, many times after taking his bath in all the holy places of pilgrimage.
Such a person is considered to be the best of the Aryan family.

So one must be intelligent enough to understand the purpose of the Vedas,
without being attached to the rituals only, and must not desire to be elevated
to the heavenly kingdoms for a better quality of sense gratification. It is not
possible for the common man in this age to follow all the rules and regulations
of the Vedic rituals, nor is it possible to study all of the Vedc'mta and the
Upcmisads thoroughly. It requires much time, energy, knowledge and resources
to execute the purposes of the Vedas. This is hardly possible in this age. The
best purpose of Vedic culture is served, however, by chanting the holy name of
the Lord, as recommended by Lord Caitanya, the deliverer of all fallen souls.
When Lord Caitanya was asked by a great Vedic scholar, Prakasananda
Sarasvati, why He, the Lord, was chanting the holy name of the Lord like a
sentimentalist instead of studying Vedc'mta philosophy, the Lord replied that
His spiritual master had found Him to be a great fool and thus asked Him to
chant the holy name of Lord Krsna. He did so, and became ecstatic like a
madman. In this Age of Kali, most of the population is foolish and not
adequately educated to understand Vedc'mta philosophy; the best purpose of
Vedc'mta philosophy is served by inoffensively chanting the holy name of the
Lord. Vedc'mta is the last word in Vedic wisdom, and the author and knower of
the Vedc'mta philosophy is Lord Krsna; and the highest Vedantist is the great
soul who takes pleasure in chanting the holy name of the Lord. That is the
ultimate purpose of all Vedic mysticism.

TEXT 47

WWWWI
mWﬁaﬁsmﬁﬁrueeu

karmahy evc‘tdhikc‘tras te



ma phalesu kadacaha
ma karma—phala—hetm bhm
ma te sahgo ’stv akarmahi

SYNONYMS

karmahi—in prescribed duties; eva—certainly; adhikc‘trah—right; te—of you;
ma—never; phalesu—in the fruits; kadc‘tccma—at any time; ma—never;
karma-phala—in the result of the work; hetuh—cause; thZh—become;
ma—never; te—of you; sahgah—attachment; astu—there should be;
akarmahi—in not doing prescribed duties.

TRANSLATION

You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to
the fruits of action. Never consider yourself the cause of the results of your
activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty.

PURPORT

There are three considerations here: prescribed duties, capricious work, and
inaction. Prescribed duties are activities enjoined in terms of one’s acquired
modes of material nature. Capricious work means actions without the sanction
of authority, and inaction means not performing one’s prescribed duties. The
Lord advised that Arjuna not be inactive, but that he perform his prescribed
duty without being attached to the result. One who is attached to the result of
his work is also the cause of the action. Thus he is the enjoyer or sufferer of
the result of such actions.

As far as prescribed duties are concerned, they can be fitted into three
subdivisions, namely routine work, emergency work and desired activities.
Routine work performed as an obligation in terms of the scriptural
injunctions, without desire for results, is action in the mode of goodness. Work
with results becomes the cause of bondage; therefore such work is not
auspicious. Everyone has his proprietary right in regard to prescribed duties,



but should act without attachment to the result; such disinterested obligatory
duties doubtlessly lead one to the path of liberation.

Arjuna was therefore advised by the Lord to fight as a matter of duty
without attachment to the result. His nonparticipation in the battle is another
side of attachment. Such attachment never leads one to the path of salvation.
Any attachment, positive or negative, is cause for bondage. Inaction is sinful.
Therefore, fighting as a matter of duty was the only auspicious path of
salvation for Arjuna.

TEXT 48

szWﬁIWFea-IWI
Wzaﬁiﬁimﬁwmﬁuew

yoga-sthah kum karmahi
sahgam tyaktvc‘t dhahaﬁjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoh samo thZtvc‘t
samatvam yoga ucyate

SYNONYMS

yoga—sthah—equipoised; kum—perform; karmahi—your duties;
sahgam—attachment; tyaktvd—giving up; dhahaﬁjaya—O Arjuna;
siddhi—asiddhyoh—in success and failure; samah—equipoised;
bhﬁtUd—becoming; samatvam—equanimity; yogah—yoga; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

Perform your duty equipoised, O Arjuna, abandoning all attachment to
success or failure. Such equanimity is called yoga.

PURPORT

Krsna tells Arjuna that he should act in yoga. And what is that yoga? Yoga



means to concentrate the mind upon the Supreme by controlling the
ever-disturbing senses. And who is the Supreme? The Supreme is the Lord.
And because He Himself is telling Arjuna to fight, Arjuna has nothing to do
with the results of the fight. Gain or Victory are Krsna’s concern; Arjuna is
simply advised to act according to the dictation of Krsna. The following of
Krsna’s dictation is real yoga, and this is practiced in the process called Krsna
consciousness. By Krsna consciousness only can one give up the sense of
proprietorship. One has to become the servant of Krsna, or the servant of the
servant of Krsna. That is the right way to discharge duty in Krsna
consciousness, which alone can help one to act in yoga.

Arjuna is a ksati'iya, and as such he is participating in the
vamc‘ts’rama—dharma institution. It is said in the Visuu Puraha that in the
vamc‘ts’rama—dharma, the whole aim is to satisfy Visnu. No one should satisfy
himself, as is the rule in the material world, but one should satisfy Krsna. So
unless one satisfies Krsna, one cannot correctly observe the principles of
vamc‘ts’rama—dharma. Indirectly, Arjuna was advised to act as Krsna told him.

TEXT 49

wwﬁWI
agiwﬁaavwzmaa IIasII

dareha hy avaram karma
buddhi—yogc‘td dhahaﬁjaya
buddhau saraham anviccha

krpahc‘th phala-hetavah

SYNONYMS

dareha—discard it at a long distance; hi—certainly; avaTam—abominable;
karma—activity; buddhi-yogc‘tt—on the strength of Krsna consciousness;
dhahaﬁjaya—O conqueror of wealth; buddhau—in such consciousness;
saraham—full surrender; anviccha—try for; krpahc‘th—misers;



phala-hetavah—those desiring fruitive results.

TRANSLATION

O Dhanaﬁjaya, keep all abominable activities far distant by devotional
service, and in that consciousness surrender unto the Lord. Those Who want to
enjoy the fruits of their work are misers.

PURPORT

One who has actually come to understand one’s constitutional position as
an eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save working in Krsna
consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means transcendental loving
service to the Lord. Such devotional service is the right course of action for
the living entity. Only misers desire to enjoy the fruit of their own work just to
be further entangled in material bondage. Except for work in Krsna
consciousness, all activities are abominable because they continually bind the
worker to the cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to be
the cause of work. Everything should be done in Krsna consciousness, for the
satisfaction of Krsna. Misers do not know how to utilize the assets of riches
which they acquire by good fortune or by hard labor. One should spend all
energies working in Krsna consciousness, and that will make one’s life
successful. Like misers, unfortunate persons do not employ their human energy
in the service of the Lord.

TEXT 50

WWﬁWI
Www:$ﬁqﬁamuwu

buddhi—yukto jahdtiha
ubhe sukrta—duskrte
tasmc‘td yogc‘tya yujyasva
yogah karmasu kaus’alam



SYNONYMS

buddhi-yuktah—one who is engaged in devotional service; jahc'tti—can get rid
of; iha—in this life; ubhe—both; sukrta—duskrte—good and bad results;
tasmc‘It—therefore; yogaya—for the sake of devotional service; yujyasva—be so
engaged; yogah—Krsna consciousness; karmasu—in all activities;
kaus’alam—art.

TRANSLATION

A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad
actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, Which is the art of all work.

PURPORT

Since time immemorial each living entity has accumulated the various
reactions of his good and bad work. As such, he is continuously ignorant of his
real constitutional position. One’s ignorance can be removed by the
instruction of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, which teaches one to surrender unto Lord Sri
Krsna in all respects and become liberated from the chained Victimization of
action and reaction, birth after birth. Arjuna is therefore advised to act in
Krsna consciousness, the purifying process of resultant action.

TEXT 51

cblisi §§ng % H963 cqevl WW: I
W: qa; 31W" 29 ||

 

karma—jam buddhi—yuktc‘t hi

phalam tyaktvc‘t mahisihah
jahma—bahdha-vihirmuktc‘th
padam gacchcmty ahamayam



SYNONYMS

karma—jam—due to fruitive activities; buddhi—yuktc‘th—being engaged in
devotional service; hi—certainly; phalam—results; tyaktvc't—giving up;
mahisihah—great sages or devotees; jahma—bahdha—from the bondage of birth
and death; vihirmuktc‘th—liberated; padam—position; gacchcmti—they reach;
ahamayam—without miseries.

TRANSLATION

By thus engaging in devotional service to the Lord, great sages or devotees
free themselves from the results of work in the material world. In this way they
become free from the cycle of birth and death and attain the state beyond all
miseries [by going back to Godhead].

PURPORT

The liberated living entities belong to that place where there are no
material miseries. The Bhagavatam (10.14.58) says:

samasritc‘t ye pada—pallava—plavam
mahat—padam punya—yas’o murareh
bhavc‘tmbudhir vatsa—padam param padam
padam padam yad vipadc‘tm ha tesc‘tm

“For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the
shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda, or the giver of
mukti, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in a calf’s
footprint. param padam, or the place where there are no material miseries, or
Vaikuntha, is his goal, not the place where there is danger in every step of
life.”

Owing to ignorance, one does not know that this material world is a
miserable place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignorance only,
less intelligent persons try to adjust to the situation by fruitive activities,



thinking that the resultant actions will make them happy. They do not know
that no kind of material body anywhere within the universe can give life
without miseries. The miseries of life, namely birth, death, old age and diseases,
are present everywhere within the material world. But one who understands
his real constitutional position as the eternal servitor of the Lord, and thus
knows the position of the Personality of Godhead, engages himself in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomes qualified
to enter into the Vaikuntha planets, where there is neither material, miserable
life nor the inﬂuence of time and death. To know one’s constitutional position
means to know also the sublime position of the Lord. One who wrongly thinks
that the living entity’s position and the Lord’s position are on the same level is
to be understood to be in darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in
the devotional service of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves
the way for the repetition of birth and death. But one who, understanding that
his position is to serve, transfers himself to the service of the Lord, at once
becomes eligible for Vaikunthaloka. Service for the cause of the Lord is called
karma—yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words, devotional service to the Lord.

TEXT 52

Wamwzﬁa‘ﬁaﬁwﬁn
Wmﬁaﬁaﬁmmaumu

yada te moha—kalilam

buddhir vyatitarisyati

tadc‘t gahtc‘tsi hirvedam
s’rotavyasya s’rutasya ca

SYNONYMS

yada—when; te—your; moha—of illusion; kalilam—dense forest;
buddhih—transcendental service with intelligence; vyatitarisyati—surpasses;
tadc‘t—at that time; gahtc‘t asi—you shall go; hirvedam—callousness;



s’rotavyasya—toward all that is to be heard; s’rutasya—all that is already heard;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

When your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion, you
shall become indifferent to all that has been heard and all that is to be heard.

PURPORT

There are many good examples in the lives of the great devotees of the Lord
of those who became indifferent to the rituals of the Vedas simply by
devotional service to the Lord. When a person factually understands Krsna
and his relationship with Krsna, he naturally becomes completely indifferent
to the rituals of fruitive activities, even though an experienced brc‘thmaha. Sri
Madhavendra Puri, a great devotee and cicc'n‘ya in the line of the devotees, says:

sandhyc‘t—vahdaha bhadram astu bhavato bhoh snc‘ma tubhyam hamo
bho devah pitaras’ ca tarpaha—vidhau haham ksamah ksamyatc‘tm
yatra kvc‘tpi m'sadya yc‘tdava—kulottamasya kamsa-dvisah
smc‘wam smc‘wam agham harami tad alam manye kim anyeha me

“O my prayers three times a day, all glory to you. O bathing, I offer my
obeisances unto you. O demigods! O forefathers! Please excuse me for my
inability to offer you my respects. Now wherever I sit, I can remember the
great descendant of the Yadu dynasty [Krsna], the enemy of Kamsa, and
thereby I can free myself from all sinful bondage. I think this is sufficient for
me.”

The Vedic rites and rituals are imperative for neophytes: comprehending all
kinds of prayer three times a day, taking a bath early in the morning, offering
respects to the forefathers, etc. But when one is fully in Krsna consciousness
and is engaged in His transcendental loving service, one becomes indifferent
to all these regulative principles because he has already attained perfection. If
one can reach the platform of understanding by service to the Supreme Lord

Krsna, he has no longer to execute different types of penances and sacrifices as



recommended in revealed scriptures. And, similarly, if one has not understood
that the purpose of the Vedas is to reach Krsna and simply engages in the
rituals, etc., then he is uselessly wasting time in such engagements. Persons in
Krsna consciousness transcend the limit of s’abda-bi‘ahma, or the range of the

Vedas and Upcmisads.

TEXT 53

gﬁrﬁqﬁwﬁwmﬁrﬁMI
WWWIIKBH

s’ruti—Uipratipahhc‘t te

yada sthc‘tsyati m's’calci
samadhc‘w acalc‘t buddhis

tadc‘t yogam avapsyasi

SYNONYMS

s’mti—of Vedic revelation; Uipmtipahm't—without being inﬂuenced by the
fruitive results; te—your; yada—when; sthc‘tsyati—remains; m's’calc't—unmoved;
samadhau—in transcendental consciousness, or Krsna consciousness;
acalc‘t—unﬂinching; buddhih—intelligence; tadc't—at that time;
yogam—self-realization; avdpsyasi—you will achieve.

TRANSLATION

When your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the
Vedas, and When it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization, then you Will
have attained the divine consciousness.

PURPORT

To say that one is in samadhi is to say that one has fully realized Krsna
consciousness; that is, one in full samadhi has realized Brahman, Paramatma



and Bhagavan. The highest perfection of self-realization is to understand that
one is eternally the servitor of Krsna and that one’s only business is to
discharge one’s duties in Krsna consciousness. A Krsna conscious person, or
unﬂinching devotee of the Lord, should not be disturbed by the ﬂowery
language of the Vedas nor be engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the
heavenly kingdom. In Krsna consciousness, one comes directly into
communion with Krsna, and thus all directions from Krsna may be understood
in that transcendental state. One is sure to achieve results by such activities
and attain conclusive knowledge. One has only to carry out the orders of
Krsna or His representative, the spiritual master.

TEXT 54

313133313
WWWWWI
WﬁwﬁaWaﬁaWuaeu

arjuha uvc‘tca
sthita—prajﬁasya kc‘t bhc‘tsc‘t
samadhi-sthasya kes’ava
sthita—dhih kim prabhc‘tseta
kim asita wajeta kim

SYNONYMS

arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; sthita—prajﬁasya—of one who is situated in fixed
Krsna consciousness; ka—what; bhc'tsc't—language; samadhi-sthasya—of one
situated in trance; kes’aUa—O Krsna; sthita-dhih—one fixed in Krsna
consciousness; kim—what; prabhc‘tseta—speaks; kim—how; asita—does remain
still; wajeta—walks; kim—how.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Krsna, What are the symptoms of one Whose consciousness is



thus merged in transcendence? How does he speak, and What is his language?
How does he sit, and how does he walk?

PURPORT

As there are symptoms for each and every man, in terms of his particular
situation, similarly one who is Krsna conscious has his particular
nature—talking, walking, thinking, feeling, etc. As a rich man has his
symptoms by which he is known as a rich man, as a diseased man has his
symptoms by which he is known as diseased, or as a learned man has his
symptoms, so a man in transcendental consciousness of Krsna has specific
symptoms in various dealings. One can know his specific symptoms from the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Most important is how the man in Krsna consciousness speaks;
for speech is the most important quality of any man. It is said that a fool is
undiscovered as long as he does not speak, and certainly a well-dressed fool
cannot be identified unless he speaks, but as soon as he speaks, he reveals
himself at once. The immediate symptom of a Krsna conscious man is that he
speaks only of Krsna and of matters relating to Him. Other symptoms then
automatically follow, as stated below.

TEXT 55

W
Wwwmahqm‘ﬁml
Wamgeﬁaaueaﬁaﬁuaau

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
prajahc‘tti yada kamah
sarvc‘m pc‘wtha maho-gatc‘m
citmcmy evc‘ttmahc‘t tustah
sthita—prajﬁas tadocyate



SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
prajahc'tti—gives up; yada—when; kamah—desires for sense gratification;
sarvc‘m—of all varieties; pc‘mha—O son of Prtha; mahah—gatc‘m—of mental
concoction; citmahi—in the pure state of the soul; eva—certainly; citmcmc't—by
the purified mind; tustah—satisfied; sthita-pmjﬁah—transcendentally situated;
tadc‘t—at that time; ucyate—is said.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Partha, When a man gives up
all varieties of desire for sense gratification, Which arise from mental
concoction, and When his mind, thus purified, finds satisfaction in the self
alone, then he is said to be in pure transcendental consciousness.

PURPORT

The Bhagavatam affirms that any person who is fully in Krsna
consciousness, or devotional service of the Lord, has all the good qualities of
the great sages, whereas a person who is not so transcendentally situated has
no good qualifications, because he is sure to be taking refuge in his own mental
concoctions. Consequently, it is rightly said herein that one has to give up all
kinds of sense desire manufactured by mental concoction. Artificially, such
sense desires cannot be stopped. But if one is engaged in Krsna consciousness,
then, automatically, sense desires subside without extraneous efforts.
Therefore, one has to engage himself in Krsna consciousness without
hesitation, for this devotional service will instantly help one onto the platform
of transcendental consciousness. The highly developed soul always remains
satisfied in himself by realizing himself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme
Lord. Such a transcendentally situated person has no sense desires resulting
from petty materialism; rather, he remains always happy in his natural position
of eternally serving the Supreme Lord.



TEXT 56

§me: 111311 W: I
W: WW

II ‘18 ||

duhkhesv ahudvigha—mahc‘th
sukhesu vigata—sprhah
vita—rciga—bhaya—krodhah
sthita—dhir muhir ucyate

SYNONYMS

duhkhesu—in the threefold miseries; ahudvigha—mahc‘th—without being
agitated in mind; sukhesu—in happiness; Uigata—sprhah—without being
interested; vita—free from; rc‘tga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhah—and
anger; sthita—dhih—whose mind is steady; muhih—a sage; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

One Who is not disturbed in mind even amidst the threefold miseries or
elated When there is happiness, and Who is free from attachment, fear and
anger, is called a sage of steady mind.

PURPORT

The word mum' means one who can agitate his mind in various ways for
mental speculation without coming to a factual conclusion. It is said that every
mum' has a different angle of Vision, and unless a mum' differs from other
mums, he cannot be called a mum' in the strict sense of the term. Nasc‘w Tsir
yasya matam ha bhihham (Mahabharata, Vana-parva 313.117). But a sthita-dhir
mum', as mentioned herein by the Lord, is different from an ordinary mum'.
The sthita-dhh‘ mum' is always in Krsna consciousness, for he has exhausted all
his business of creative speculation. He is called



pras’c‘mta—hihs’esa—maho—rathc‘mtara (Stotra-rama 43), or one who has surpassed
the stage of mental speculations and has come to the conclusion that Lord Sri
Krsna, or Vasudeva, is everything (vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahc‘ttmc‘t
su-dmlabhah). He is called a mum' fixed in mind. Such a fully Krsna conscious
person is not at all disturbed by the onslaughts of the threefold miseries, for he
accepts all miseries as the mercy of the Lord, thinking himself only worthy of
more trouble due to his past misdeeds; and he sees that his miseries, by the
grace of the Lord, are minimized to the lowest. Similarly, when he is happy he
gives credit to the Lord, thinking himself unworthy of the happiness; he
realizes that it is due only to the Lord’s grace that he is in such a comfortable
condition and able to render better service to the Lord. And, for the service of
the Lord, he is always daring and active and is not inﬂuenced by attachment
or aversion. Attachment means accepting things for one’s own sense
gratification, and detachment is the absence of such sensual attachment. But
one fixed in Krsna consciousness has neither attachment nor detachment
because his life is dedicated in the service of the Lord. Consequently he is not
at all angry even when his attempts are unsuccessful. Success or no success, a
Krsna conscious person is always steady in his determination.

TEXT 57

yah sarvatrc‘mabhisnehas
tat tat prc‘tpya s’ubhc‘ts’ubham
habhihahdati ha dvesti
tasya prajﬁc‘t pratisthitc‘t

SYNONYMS

yah—one who; sarvatra—everywhere; anabhisnehah—without affection;
tat—that; tat—that; prdpya—achieving; s’ubha—good; as’ubham—evil;



ha—never; abhihahdati—praises; ha—never; dvesti—envies; tasya—his;
prajﬁc't—perfect knowledge; pratisthitc't—fixed.

TRANSLATION

In the material world, one Who is unaffected by Whatever good or evil he
may obtain, neither praising it nor despising it, is firmly fixed in perfect
knowledge.

PURPORT

There is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good or
evil. One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who is unaffected by
good and evil, is to be understood to be fixed in Krsna consciousness. As long
as one is in the material world there is always the possibility of good and evil
because this world is full of duality. But one who is fixed in Krsna
consciousness is not affected by good and evil, because he is simply concerned
with Krsna, who is all-good absolute. Such consciousness in Krsna situates one
in a perfect transcendental position called, technically, samadhi.

TEXT 58

Wﬁﬁaﬁﬁsﬁﬁﬁmzl
WWWWWHX‘H

yadci samharate cc‘tyam
karma ’hgc‘miva sarvas’ah
ihdriyahihdriyarthebhyas

tasya prajﬁc‘t pratisthitc‘t

SYNONYMS

yada—when; samharate—winds up; ca—also; ayam—he; karmah—tortoise;
ahgc‘mi—limbs; iva—like; sarvas’ah—altogether; ihdriyc‘mi—senses;



ihdriya-arthebhyah—from the sense objects; tasya—his;
prajﬁc't—consciousness; pratisthitc't—fixed.

TRANSLATION

One Who is able to Withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the tortoise
draws its limbs Within the shell, is firmly fixed in perfect consciousness.

PURPORT

The test of a yogi, devotee, or self-realized soul is that he is able to control
the senses according to his plan. Most people, however, are servants of the
senses and are thus directed by the dictation of the senses. That is the answer
to the question as to how the yogi is situated. The senses are compared to
venomous serpents. They want to act very loosely and without restriction. The
yogi, or the devotee, must be very strong to control the serpents—like a snake
charmer. He never allows them to act independently. There are many
injunctions in the revealed scriptures; some of them are do-not’s, and some of
them are do’s. Unless one is able to follow the do’s and the do-not’s, restricting
oneself from sense enjoyment, it is not possible to be firmly fixed in Krsna
consciousness. The best example, set herein, is the tortoise. The tortoise can at
any moment wind up his senses and exhibit them again at any time for
particular purposes. Similarly, the senses of the Krsna conscious persons are
used only for some particular purpose in the service of the Lord and are
withdrawn otherwise. Arjuna is being taught here to use his senses for the
service of the Lord, instead of for his own satisfaction. Keeping the senses
always in the service of the Lord is the example set by the analogy of the
tortoise, who keeps the senses within.

TEXT 59

ﬁwﬁrﬁaﬁﬁtmﬁhm
maﬁra‘rswqiegrﬁaﬁﬁnasu



visayc‘t vihivartcmte
hirc‘thc‘trasya dehihah
rasa—varjam raso ’py asya
param drstvc‘t m'vartate

SYNONYMS

visayc‘th—objects for sense enjoyment; Uihivartcmte—are practiced to be
refrained from; hiraharasya—by negative restrictions; dehihah—for the
embodied; rasa—varjam—giving up the taste; rasah—sense of enjoyment;
api—although there is; asya—his; param—far superior things; drstvc‘t—by
experiencing; hivartate—he ceases from.

TRANSLATION

The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the taste
for sense objects remains. But, ceasing such engagements by experiencing a
higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.

PURPORT

Unless one is transcendentally situated, it is not possible to cease from
sense enjoyment. The process of restriction from sense enjoyment by rules and
regulations is something like restricting a diseased person from certain types of
eatables. The patient, however, neither likes such restrictions nor loses his
taste for eatables. Similarly, sense restriction by some spiritual process like
astahga—yoga, in the matter of yama, hiyama, ciscma, prahayc‘tma, pratyc‘thc‘tra,
dhc‘wam‘t, dhyc'ma, etc., is recommended for less intelligent persons who have no
better knowledge. But one who has tasted the beauty of the Supreme Lord
Krsna, in the course of his advancement in Krsna consciousness, no longer has
a taste for dead, material things. Therefore, restrictions are there for the less
intelligent neophytes in the spiritual advancement of life, but such restrictions
are only good until one actually has a taste for Krsna consciousness. When one
is actually Krsna conscious, he automatically loses his taste for pale things.



TEXT 60

maﬁaﬁﬁﬁwmzl
Wwwwmmzusou

yatato hy api kauhteya
pumsasya vipas’citah
ihdriyc‘mi pramc‘tthihi
harcmti prasabham mahah

SYNONYMS

yatatah—while endeavoring; hi—certainly; api—in spite of; kauhteya—O son
of Kunti; purusasya—of a man; vipas’citah—full of discriminating knowledge;
ihdriyc‘mi—the senses; pramc‘tthihi—agitating; harcmti—throw; prasabham—by
force; mahah—the mind.

TRANSLATION

The senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they forcibly carry
away the mind even of a man of discrimination Who is endeavoring to control
them.

PURPORT

There are many learned sages, philosophers and transcendentalists who try
to conquer the senses, but in spite of their endeavors, even the greatest of
them sometimes fall Victim to material sense enjoyment due to the agitated
mind. Even Vis’vamitra, a great sage and perfect yogi, was misled by Menaka
into sex enjoyment, although the yogi was endeavoring for sense control with
severe types of penance and yoga practice. And, of course, there are so many
similar instances in the history of the world. Therefore, it is very difficult to
control the mind and senses without being fully Krsna conscious. Without



engaging the mind in Krsna, one cannot cease such material engagements. A
practical example is given by Sri Yamunacarya, a great saint and devotee, who
says:

yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna—pc‘tdamvihde
hava—hava-rasa—dhc‘tmahy udyatam rahtum asit

tad—avadhi bata hari—sahgame smaryamc‘me
bhavati mukha—vikc‘trah susthu histhivaham ca

“Since my mind has been engaged in the service of the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna, and I have been enjoying an ever new transcendental humor, whenever
I think of sex life with a woman, my face at once turns from it, and I spit at the
thought.”

Krsna consciousness is such a transcendentally nice thing that
automatically material enjoyment becomes distasteful. It is as if a hungry man
had satisfied his hunger by a sufficient quantity of nutritious eatables.
Maharaja Ambarisa also conquered a great yogi, Durvasa Muni, simply because
his mind was engaged in Krsna consciousness (sa vai mahah
krsna—pc‘tdamvmdayor vacamsi vaikuhtha—guhc‘muvamahe).

TEXT 61

arﬁaaﬁhahmggﬁam‘iawn
aﬁﬁﬁﬁwﬁrwmqﬁrﬁmuaeu

tc‘mi sarvc‘mi samyamya
yukta asita mat—parah
vas’e hi yasyehdriydhi

tasya prajﬁc‘t pratisthitc‘t

SYNONYMS

tc‘mi—those senses; sarvc‘mi—all; samyamya—keeping under control;
yuktah—engaged; asita—should be situated; mat—parah—in relationship with
Me; vas’e—in full subjugation; hi—certainly; yasya—one whose;



ihdriyc‘mi—senses; tasya—his; prajﬁc‘t—consciousness; pratisthitc‘t—fixed.

TRANSLATION

One Who restrains his senses, keeping them under full control, and fixes his
consciousness upon Me, is known as a man of steady intelligence.

PURPORT

That the highest conception of yoga perfection is Krsna consciousness is
clearly explained in this verse. And unless one is Krsna conscious it is not at
all possible to control the senses. As cited above, the great sage Durvasa Muni
picked a quarrel with Maharaja Ambarisa, and Durvasa Muni unnecessarily
became angry out of pride and therefore could not check his senses. On the
other hand, the king, although not as powerful a yogi as the sage, but a devotee
of the Lord, silently tolerated all the sage’s injustices and thereby emerged
Victorious. The king was able to control his senses because of the following
qualifications, as mentioned in the grimad-Bbégavatam (9.4.18—20):

sa vai mahah krsna—pc‘tdamvihdayor
vacamsi vaikuhtha—guhc‘muvamahe
karau hater mandira—mc‘trjam‘tdisu

s’rutim cakc‘tracyuta-sat—kathodaye

mukuhda-lihgc‘tlaya—dars’ahe drs’au
tad—bhrtya—gc‘ttra—spars’e ’hga—sahgamam
ghrc‘mam ca tat—pc‘tda—saroja—samabhe
s’rimat—tulasyd rascmc‘tm tad—arpite

padau hareh ksetra-padahusarpahe
s’iro hrsikes’a-padabhivahdahe
kamam ca dasye ha tu kama—kc‘tmyayc‘t
yathottama—s’loka—jam‘ts’myci ratih

“King Ambarisa fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, engaged his
words in describing the abode of the Lord, his hands in cleansing the temple of



the Lord, his ears in hearing the pastimes of the Lord, his eyes in seeing the
form of the Lord, his body in touching the body of the devotee, his nostrils in
smelling the ﬂavor of the ﬂowers offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, his
tongue in tasting the tulasi leaves offered to Him, his legs in traveling to the
holy place where His temple is situated, his head in offering obeisances unto
the Lord, and his desires in fulfilling the desires of the Lord... and all these
qualifications made him fit to become a mat-pai'a devotee of the Lord.”

The word mat-pai'a is most significant in this connection. How one can
become mat-pai'a is described in the life of Maharaja Ambarisa. Srila Baladeva
Vidyabhﬂsana, a great scholar and cicc'n‘ya in the line of the mat-pai'a, remarks,
mad—bhakti—prabhc‘weha sarvehdriya—vijaya-pmvikc‘t svc‘ttma—drstih sulabheti
bhc‘wah. “The senses can be completely controlled only by the strength of
devotional service to Krsna.” Also, the example of fire is sometimes given: “As
a blazing fire burns everything within a room, Lord Visnu, situated in the
heart of the yogi, burns up all kinds of impurities.” The Yoga-sﬁti'a also
prescribes meditation on Visnu, and not meditation on the void. The so-called
yogis who meditate on something which is not on the Visnu platform simply
waste their time in a vain search after some phantasmagoria. We have to be
Krsna conscious—devoted to the Personality of Godhead. This is the aim of
the real yoga.

TEXT 62

WW:WI
Wm: WSW" 5? ||

dhydyato visayc‘m pumsah
sahgas tesﬁpajciyate

sahgc‘tt sahjc‘tyate kamah

kamat krodho ’bhijc‘tyate

SYNONYMS



dhyciyatah—while contemplating; visayc‘m—sense objects; pumsah—of a
person; sahgah—attachment; tesu—in the sense objects; upajc‘tyate—develops;
sahgc‘It—from attachment; saﬁjc‘tyate—develops; kamah—desire; kamat—from
desire; krodhah—anger; abhijc'tyate—becomes manifest.

TRANSLATION

While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attachment
for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and from lust anger arises.

PURPORT

One who is not Krsna conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of the senses. The senses require real engagements,
and if they are not engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
they will certainly seek engagement in the service of materialism. In the
material world everyone, including Lord Siva and Lord Brahma—to say
nothing of other demigods in the heavenly planets—is subjected to the
influence of sense objects, and the only method to get out of this puzzle of
material existence is to become Krsna conscious. Lord Siva was deep in
meditation, but when Parvati agitated him for sense pleasure, he agreed to the
proposal, and as a result Kartikeya was born. When Haridasa Thakura was a
young devotee of the Lord, he was similarly allured by the incarnation of
Maya-devi, but Haridasa easily passed the test because of his unalloyed
devotion to Lord Krsna. As illustrated in the above-mentioned verse of Sri
Yamunacarya, a sincere devotee of the Lord shuns all material sense
enjoyment due to his higher taste for spiritual enjoyment in the association of
the Lord. That is the secret of success. One who is not, therefore, in Krsna
consciousness, however powerful he may be in controlling the senses by
artificial repression, is sure ultimately to fail, for the slightest thought of sense
pleasure will agitate him to gratify his desires.

TEXT 63



WW3 WWW”
WWIIﬁBH

krodhc‘td bhavati sammohah

sammohc‘tt smrti—vibhramah

smrti—bhrams’c‘td buddhi—hc‘ts’o
buddhi—hc‘ts’c‘tt prahas’yati

SYNONYMS

krodhc‘tt—from anger; bhavati—takes place; sammohah—perfect illusion;
sammohc‘tt—from illusion; smTti—of memory; vibhramah—bewilderment;
smrti-bhmms’at—after bewilderment of memory; buddhi-m‘ts’ah—loss of
intelligence; buddhi-m‘ts’c‘tt—and from loss of intelligence; prahas’yati—one falls
down.

TRANSLATION

From anger, complete delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of
memory. When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and When
intelligence is lost one falls down again into the material pool.

PURPORT

Srila Rfipa Gosvami has given us this direction:

prc‘tpaﬁcikatayc‘t buddhyc‘t
hari—sambahdhi—vastuhah

mumuksubhih parityc‘tgo
vairc‘tgyam phalgu kathyate
(Bbakti-rasémrta-smdbu 1.2.258)

By development of Krsna consciousness one can know that everything has
its use in the service of the Lord. Those who are without knowledge of Krsna
consciousness artificially try to avoid material objects, and as a result, although



they desire liberation from material bondage, they do not attain to the perfect
stage of renunciation. Their so-called renunciation is called phalgu, or less
important. On the other hand, a person in Krsna consciousness knows how to
use everything in the service of the Lord; therefore he does not become a
Victim of material consciousness. For example, for an impersonalist, the Lord,
or the Absolute, being impersonal, cannot eat. Whereas an impersonalist tries
to avoid good eatables, a devotee knows that Krsna is the supreme enjoyer and
that He eats all that is offered to Him in devotion. So, after offering good
eatables to the Lord, the devotee takes the remnants, called prasc‘tdam. Thus
everything becomes spiritualized, and there is no danger of a downfall. The
devotee takes prasc‘tdam in Krsna consciousness, whereas the nondevotee
rejects it as material. The impersonalist, therefore, cannot enjoy life, due to his
artificial renunciation; and for this reason, a slight agitation of the mind pulls
him down again into the pool of material existence. It is said that such a soul,
even though rising up to the point of liberation, falls down again due to his not
having support in devotional service.

TEXT 64

WWMI
WW || 58 ||

rc‘tga-dvesa-Uimuktais tu
visaycih mdriyais’ carcm

citma—Uas’yair vidheyc‘ttmc‘t
prasc‘tdam adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

rc‘tga—attachment; dvesa—and detachment; vimuktaih—by one who has
become free from; tu—but; visayc'm—sense objects; ihdriyaih—by the senses;
carcm—acting upon; citma—vas’yaih—under one’s control; vidheya—c‘ttmc‘t—one
who follows regulated freedom; prasc‘tdam—the mercy of the Lord;



adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

But a person free from all attachment and aversion and able to control his
senses through regulative principles of freedom can obtain the complete mercy

of the Lord.

PURPORT

It is already explained that one may externally control the senses by some
artificial process, but unless the senses are engaged in the transcendental
service of the Lord, there is every chance of a fall. Although the person in full
Krsna consciousness may apparently be on the sensual plane, because of his
being Krsna conscious he has no attachment to sensual activities. The Krsna
conscious person is concerned only with the satisfaction of Krsna, and nothing
else. Therefore he is transcendental to all attachment and detachment. If
Krsna wants, the devotee can do anything which is ordinarily undesirable; and
if Krsna does not want, he shall not do that which he would have ordinarily
done for his own satisfaction. Therefore to act or not to act is within his
control because he acts only under the direction of Krsna. This consciousness
is the causeless mercy of the Lord, which the devotee can achieve in spite of
his being attached to the sensual platform.

TEXT 65

Madgzmarﬁteﬁwmh
mﬁaa‘rerﬁgﬁzqdaﬁsﬁusau

prasc‘tde sarva—duhkhc‘mc‘tm
hc‘mir asyopajc‘tyate
prasahna—cetaso hy cis’u
buddhih paryavatisthate



SYNONYMS

prasc‘tde—on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva—of all;
duhkhc‘mc‘tm—material miseries; hc‘mih—destruction; asya—his;
upajdyate—takes place; prasahha—cetasah—of the happy-minded;
hi—certainly; cis’u—very soon; buddhih—intelligence; paTi—sufficiently;
avatisthate—becomes established.

TRANSLATION

For one thus satisfied [in Krsna consciousness], the threefold miseries of
material existence exist no longer; in such satisfied consciousness, one’s
intelligence is soon well established.

TEXT 66

WWHWWI
3W::rrﬁarsnw$=rz§aauaeu

hasti buddhir ayuktasya
ha cc‘tyuktasya bhavcmc‘t
ha cc‘tbhc‘wayatah s’c‘mtir
as’c‘mtasya kutah sukham

SYNONYMS

ha asti—there cannot be; buddhih—transcendental intelligence;
ayuktasya—of one who is not connected (with Krsna consciousness); ha—not;
ca—and; ayuktasya—of one devoid of Krsna consciousness; bhavahd—fixed
mind (in happiness); ha—not; ca—and; abhc‘wayatah—of one who is not fixed;
s’c‘mtih—peace; as’c‘mtasya—of the unpeaceful; kutah—where is;
sukham—happiness.



TRANSLATION

One Who is not connected With the Supreme [in Krsna consciousness] can
have neither transcendental intelligence nor a steady mind, Without Which there
is no possibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness Without peace?

PURPORT

Unless one is in Krsna consciousness, there is no possibility of peace. 80 it is
confirmed in the Fifth Chapter (5.29) that when one understands that Krsna
is the only enjoyer of all the good results of sacrifice and penance, that He is
the proprietor of all universal manifestations, and that He is the real friend of
all living entities, then only can one have real peace. Therefore, if one is not
in Krsna consciousness, there cannot be a final goal for the mind. Disturbance
is due to want of an ultimate goal, and when one is certain that Krsna is the
enjoyer, proprietor and friend of everyone and everything, then one can, with
a steady mind, bring about peace. Therefore, one who is engaged without a
relationship with Krsna is certainly always in distress and is without peace,
however much he may make a show of peace and spiritual advancement in life.
Krsna consciousness is a self-manifested peaceful condition which can be
achieved only in relationship with Krsna.

TEXT 67
WEWWSEWI
awaﬁruefwiaﬁamﬁruseu

ihdriyc‘mc‘tm hi caratc‘tm
yam memo ’huvidhiyate
tad asya harati prajhc‘tm
vc‘tym havam ivdmbhasi



SYNONYMS

ihdriyc‘mc‘tm—of the senses; hi—certainly; caratc‘tm—while roaming; yat—with
which; mahah—the mind; ahuvidhiyate—becomes constantly engaged;
tat—that; asya—his; harati—takes away; prajﬁc‘tm—intelligence;
Udyuh—Wind; havam—a boat; iva—like; ambhasi—on the water.

TRANSLATION

As a strong Wind sweeps away a boat on the water, even one of the roaming
senses on Which the mind focuses can carry away a man’s intelligence.

PURPORT

Unless all of the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, even one of
them engaged in sense gratification can deviate the devotee from the path of
transcendental advancement. As mentioned in the life of Maharaja Ambarisa,
all of the senses must be engaged in Krsna consciousness, for that is the correct
technique for controlling the mind.

TEXT 68

WWWWM
WWWWWMW

tasmc‘td yasya mahc‘I-bc‘tho
higrhitc‘mi sarvas’ah
ihdriyahihdriyarthebhyas
tasya prajﬁc‘t pratisthitc‘t

SYNONYMS

tasmc‘It—therefore; yasya—whose; mahc‘t—bc‘tho—O mighty-armed one;
higrhitc‘mi—so curbed down; sarvas’ah—all around; ihdriyc‘mi—the senses;



ihdriya-arthebhyah—from sense objects; tasya—his; prajﬁc‘t—intelligence;
pratisthitc‘t—fixed.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, 0 mighty-armed, one Whose senses are restrained from their
objects is certainly of steady intelligence.

PURPORT

One can curb the forces of sense gratification only by means of Krsna
consciousness, or engaging all the senses in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord. As enemies are curbed by superior force, the senses can similarly
be curbed, not by any human endeavor, but only by keeping them engaged in
the service of the Lord. One who has understood this—that only by Krsna
consciousness is one really established in intelligence and that one should
practice this art under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master—is called
sadhaka, or a suitable candidate for liberation.

TEXT 69
mﬁmasiiﬁmiaaisrmﬁahn‘il
WWWWWWEQHISRH

ya his’c‘t sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm
tasyc‘tm jagarti samyami
yasyc‘tm jagrati thZtc‘mi
sci m's’c‘t pas’yato muheh

SYNONYMS

yc‘t—what; m's’c‘t—is night; sarva—all; thZtc‘mc‘Im—of living entities; tasyc‘tm—in
that; jagarti—is wakeful; samyami—the self-controlled; yasyc‘tm—in which;
jc'tgmti—are awake; bhﬁtc'mi—all beings; sc't—that is; his’c't—night;



pas’yatah—for the introspective; muheh—sage.

TRANSLATION

What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled;
and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the introspective sage.

PURPORT

There are two classes of intelligent men. One is intelligent in material
activities for sense gratification, and the other is introspective and awake to
the cultivation of self-realization. Activities of the introspective sage, or
thoughtful man, are night for persons materially absorbed. Materialistic
persons remain asleep in such a night due to their ignorance of self-realization.
The introspective sage remains alert in the “night” of the materialistic men.
The sage feels transcendental pleasure in the gradual advancement of spiritual
culture, whereas the man in materialistic activities, being asleep to
self-realization, dreams of varieties of sense pleasure, feeling sometimes happy
and sometimes distressed in his sleeping condition. The introspective man is
always indifferent to materialistic happiness and distress. He goes on with his
self-realization activities undisturbed by material reactions.

TEXT 70
WW
quﬁmﬁamI
Winﬁeﬁraﬁ
HMHWIIGOII

cipmyamc‘mam acala—pratistham
samudram cipah pravis’cmti yadvat
tadvat kamc‘t yam pravis’cmti sarve

sa s’c‘mtim cipnoti ha kama—kc‘tmi



SYNONYMS

cipmyamc‘mam—always being filled; acala—pmtistham—steadily situated;
samudram—the ocean; cipah—waters; pravis’ahti—enter; yadvat—as;
tadvat—so; kamah—desires; yam—unto whom; pravis’ahti—enter; sarve—all;
sah—that person; s’c‘mtim—peace; cipnoti—achieves; ha—not;
kama-kami—one who desires to fulfill desires.

TRANSLATION

A person Who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires—that enter
like rivers into the ocean, Which is ever being filled but is always still—can
alone achieve peace, and not the man Who strives to satisfy such desires.

PURPORT

Although the vast ocean is always filled with water, it is always, especially
during the rainy season, being filled with much more water. But the ocean
remains the same—steady; it is not agitated, nor does it cross beyond the limit
of its brink. That is also true of a person fixed in Krsna consciousness. As long
as one has the material body, the demands of the body for sense gratification
will continue. The devotee, however, is not disturbed by such desires, because
of his fullness. A Krsna conscious man is not in need of anything, because the
Lord fulfills all his material necessities. Therefore he is like the ocean—always
full in himself. Desires may come to him like the waters of the rivers that ﬂow
into the ocean, but he is steady in his activities, and he is not even slightly
disturbed by desires for sense gratification. That is the proof of a Krsna
conscious man—one who has lost all inclinations for material sense
gratification, although the desires are present. Because he remains satisfied in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord, he can remain steady, like the
ocean, and therefore enjoy full peace. Others, however, who want to fulfill
desires even up to the limit of liberation, what to speak of material success,
never attain peace. The fruitive workers, the salvationists, and also the yogis



who are after mystic powers are all unhappy because of unfulfilled desires. But
the person in Krsna consciousness is happy in the service of the Lord, and he
has no desires to be fulfilled. In fact, he does not even desire liberation from
the so-called material bondage. The devotees of Krsna have no material
desires, and therefore they are in perfect peace.

TEXT 71

szwmﬁzlﬁ'zl
WWﬂmﬁaﬁWﬁumu

vihc‘tya kamc‘m yah sarvc‘m

pumc‘tms’ carati m'hsprhah
hirmamo hirahahkc‘trah
sa s’c‘mtim adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

Uihc'tya—giving up; kamah—material desires for sense gratification; yah—who;
sarvc‘m—all; pumah—a person; carati—lives; hihsprhah—desireless;
hirmamah—without a sense of proprietorship; hirahahkc‘wah—without false
ego; sah—he; s’c‘mtim—perfect peace; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

A person Who has given up all desires for sense gratification, Who lives free
from desires, Who has given up all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of false
ego—he alone can attain real peace.

PURPORT

To become desireless means not to desire anything for sense gratification.
In other words, desire for becoming Krsna conscious is actually desirelessness.
To understand one’s actual position as the eternal servitor of Krsna, without



falsely claiming this material body to be oneself and without falsely claiming
proprietorship over anything in the world, is the perfect stage of Krsna
consciousness. One who is situated in this perfect stage knows that because
Krsna is the proprietor of everything, everything must be used for the
satisfaction of Krsna. Arjuna did not want to fight for his own sense
satisfaction, but when he became fully Krsna conscious he fought because
Krsna wanted him to fight. For himself there was no desire to fight, but for
Krsna the same Arjuna fought to his best ability. Real desirelessness is desire
for the satisfaction of Krsna, not an artificial attempt to abolish desires. The
living entity cannot be desireless or senseless, but he does have to change the
quality of the desires. A materially desireless person certainly knows that
everything belongs to Krsna (is’c‘wc‘tsyam idam sarvam), and therefore he does
not falsely claim proprietorship over anything. This transcendental knowledge
is based on self-realization—namely, knowing perfectly well that every living
entity is an eternal part and parcel of Krsna in spiritual identity, and that the
eternal position of the living entity is therefore never on the level of Krsna or
greater than Him. This understanding of Krsna consciousness is the basic
principle of real peace.

TEXT 72

waﬁﬁﬁaﬁnmﬁﬁﬁimﬁlﬁﬁn
Wﬁwﬁﬁmﬁumu

esc‘t brc‘thmi sthitih pc‘wtha
haihc‘tm prc‘tpya vimuhyati
sthitvc‘tsyc‘tm anta—kc‘tle ’pi
brahma—hirvc‘mam chhati

SYNONYMS

esc‘t—this; brc‘thmi—spiritual; sthitih—situation; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha;
ha—never; enam—this; prdpya—achieving; Uimuhyati—one is bewildered;



sthitvc‘I—being situated; asyc‘tm—in this; anta—kc‘tle—at the end of life;
api—also; brahma—hirvc‘mam—the spiritual kingdom of God; chhati—one
attains.

TRANSLATION

That is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining Which a man is
not bewildered. If one is thus situated even at the hour of death, one can enter
into the kingdom of God.

PURPORT

One can attain Krsna consciousness or divine life at once, within a
second—or one may not attain such a state of life even after millions of births.
It is only a matter of understanding and accepting the fact. Khatvanga
Maharaja attained this state of life just a few minutes before his death, by
surrendering unto Krsna. Nirvana means ending the process of materialistic
life. According to Buddhist philosophy, there is only void after the completion
of this material life, but Bhagavad-gitc‘t teaches differently. Actual life begins
after the completion of this material life. For the gross materialist it is
sufficient to know that one has to end this materialistic way of life, but for
persons who are spiritually advanced, there is another life after this
materialistic life. Before ending this life, if one fortunately becomes Krsna
conscious, he at once attains the stage of brahma-nirvc‘ma. There is no
difference between the kingdom of God and the devotional service of the
Lord. Since both of them are on the absolute plane, to be engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord is to have attained the spiritual
kingdom. In the material world there are activities of sense gratification,
whereas in the spiritual world there are activities of Krsna consciousness.
Attainment of Krsna consciousness even during this life is immediate
attainment of Brahman, and one who is situated in Krsna consciousness has
certainly already entered into the kingdom of God.

Brahman is just the opposite of matter. Therefore brc‘thmi sthiti means “not
on the platform of material activities.” Devotional service of the Lord is



accepted in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t as the liberated stage (set guhc‘m samatityaitcih
brahma—bhﬁyc‘tya kalpate). Therefore, brc‘thmi sthiti is liberation from material
bondage.

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has summarized this Second Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t as being the contents for the whole text. In the Bhagavad-gitc‘t,
the subject matters are karma—yoga, jﬁc‘ma-yoga, and bhakti—yoga. In the Second
Chapter karma—yoga and jﬁc‘ma—yoga have been clearly discussed, and a glimpse
of bhakti-yoga has also been given, as the contents for the complete text.

Thus end the Bhaktivedahta Purports to the Second Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Contents.

 

Karma-yoga

TEXT 1

W331?
WWWWI
WWﬁﬁﬁﬁwﬁrWueu

arjuha uvc‘tca
jyc‘tyasi cet karmahas te
matd buddhir jahcirdaha
tat kim karmahi ghore mam
hiyojayasi kes’ava



SYNONYMS

arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; jyc‘Iyasi—better; cet—if; karmahah—than fruitive
action; te—by You; matc't—is considered; buddhih—intelligence;
jcmc‘trdaha—O Krsna; tat—therefore; kim—why; karmahi—in action;
ghore—ghastly; mam—me; hiyojayasi—You are engaging; kes’ava—O Krsna.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Janardana, O Kes’ava, Why do You want to engage me in this
ghastly warfare, if You think that intelligence is better than fruitive work?

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna has very elaborately
described the constitution of the soul in the previous chapter, with a View to
delivering His intimate friend Arjuna from the ocean of material grief. And
the path of realization has been recommended: buddhi-yoga, or Krsna
consciousness. Sometimes Krsna consciousness is misunderstood to be inertia,
and one with such a misunderstanding often withdraws to a secluded place to
become fully Krsna conscious by chanting the holy name of Lord Krsna. But
without being trained in the philosophy of Krsna consciousness, it is not
advisable to chant the holy name of Krsna in a secluded place, where one may
acquire only cheap adoration from the innocent public. Arjuna also thought of
Krsna consciousness or buddhi-yoga, or intelligence in spiritual advancement
of knowledge, as something like retirement from active life and the practice of
penance and austerity at a secluded place. In other words, he wanted to
skillfully avoid the fighting by using Krsna consciousness as an excuse. But as a
sincere student, he placed the matter before his master and questioned Krsna
as to his best course of action. In answer, Lord Krsna elaborately explained
karma-yoga, or work in Krsna consciousness, in this Third Chapter.

TEXT 2



Barﬁréiﬁaaméiﬁgﬁﬁma‘iaﬁl
aﬁeaaﬁfaaaﬁéﬁrswwuau

vyc‘tmis’reheva vc‘tkyeha
buddhim mohayasiva me

tad ekam vada his’citya
yeha s’reyo ’ham ciphuyc‘tm

SYNONYMS

vyc‘tmis’reha—by equivocal; iva—certainly; vc‘tkyeha—words;
buddhim—intelligence; mohayasi—You are bewildering; iva—certainly;
me—my; tat—therefore; ekam—only one; vada—please tell;
his’citya—ascertaining; yeha—by which; s’reyah—real benefit; aham—I;
ciphuyc‘tm—may have.

TRANSLATION

My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions. Therefore,
please tell me decisively Which Will be most beneficial for me.

PURPORT

In the previous chapter, as a prelude to the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, many different
paths were explained, such as scihkhya-yoga, buddhi-yoga, control of the senses
by intelligence, work without fruitive desire, and the position of the neophyte.
This was all presented unsystematically. A more organized outline of the path
would be necessary for action and understanding. Arjuna, therefore, wanted to
clear up these apparently confusing matters so that any common man could
accept them without misinterpretation. Although Krsna had no intention of
confusing Arjuna by any jugglery of words, Arjuna could not follow the
process of Krsna consciousness—either by inertia or by active service. In other
words, by his questions he is clearing the path of Krsna consciousness for all
students who seriously want to understand the mystery of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t.



TEXT 3

W
ﬁsmﬁmwﬁmwml
WWWWHII

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
loke ’smih dvi—vidhc‘t m'sthc‘t
purc‘t proktc‘t mayahagha
jﬁc‘ma—yogeha scihkhyc‘mc‘tm
karma—yogena yogmc‘tm

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; loke—in the
world; asmih—this; dvi—Uidhc‘t—two kinds of; m'sthc‘t—faith; purc‘t—formerly;
proktc‘t—were said; maya—by Me; ahagha—O sinless one; jﬁc‘ma-yogeha—by
the linking process of knowledge; scihkhyc'mc‘tm—of the empiric philosophers;
karma—yogeha—by the linking process of devotion; yogihc‘tm—of the devotees.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O sinless Arjuna, I have already
explained that there are two classes of men Who try to realize the self. Some are
inclined to understand it by empirical, philosophical speculation, and others by
devotional service.

PURPORT

In the Second Chapter, verse 39, the Lord explained two kinds of
procedures—namely sc‘mkhya—yoga and karma-yoga, or buddhi-yoga. In this
verse, the Lord explains the same more clearly. Sc'mkhya-yoga, or the analytical
study of the nature of spirit and matter, is the subject matter for persons who



are inclined to speculate and understand things by experimental knowledge
and philosophy. The other class of men work in Krsna consciousness, as it is
explained in the 61st verse of the Second Chapter. The Lord has explained,
also in the 39th verse, that by working by the principles of buddhi-yoga, or
Krsna consciousness, one can be relieved from the bonds of action; and,
furthermore, there is no ﬂaw in the process. The same principle is more clearly
explained in the 61st verse—that this buddhi-yoga is to depend entirely on the
Supreme (or more specifically, on Krsna), and in this way all the senses can be
brought under control very easily. Therefore, both the yogas are
interdependent, as religion and philosophy. Religion without philosophy is
sentiment, or sometimes fanaticism, while philosophy without religion is
mental speculation. The ultimate goal is Krsna, because the philosophers who
are also sincerely searching after the Absolute Truth come in the end to Krsna
consciousness. This is also stated in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The whole process is to
understand the real position of the self in relation to the Superself. The
indirect process is philosophical speculation, by which, gradually, one may
come to the point of Krsna consciousness; and the other process is directly
connecting with everything in Krsna consciousness. Of these two, the path of
Krsna consciousness is better because it does not depend on purifying the
senses by a philosophical process. Krsna consciousness is itself the purifying
process, and by the direct method of devotional service it is simultaneously
easy and sublime.

TEXT 4

WWWWWS’ﬁI
Haamﬁﬁaﬁrﬁéaﬁmﬁﬁrueu

ha karmahc‘tm aharambhc‘m
haiskarmyam puruso ’s’hute
ha ca sannyasam‘td eva
siddhim samadhigacchati



SYNONYMS

ha—not; karmahc‘tm—of prescribed duties; aharambhc‘tt—by nonperformance;
haiskarmyam—freedom from reaction; purusah—a man; as’hute—achieves;
ha—nor; ca—also; sannyasahc‘tt—by renunciation; eva—simply;
siddhim—success; samadhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

Not by merely abstaining from work can one achieve freedom from reaction,
nor by renunciation alone can one attain perfection.

PURPORT

The renounced order of life can be accepted when one has been purified by
the discharge of the prescribed form of duties which are laid down just to
purify the hearts of materialistic men. Without purification, one cannot attain
success by abruptly adopting the fourth order of life (sannyc‘tsa). According to
the empirical philosophers, simply by adopting sannyc‘tsa, or retiring from
fruitive activities, one at once becomes as good as Narayana. But Lord Krsna
does not approve this principle. Without purification of heart, sannyc‘tsa is
simply a disturbance to the social order. On the other hand, if someone takes
to the transcendental service of the Lord, even without discharging his
prescribed duties, whatever he may be able to advance in the cause is accepted
by the Lord (buddhi—yoga). Sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya trc‘tyate mahato bhayc‘tt.
Even a slight performance of such a principle enables one to overcome great
difficulties.

TEXT 5

?%WWWI
mmzaﬁﬁaaizwﬁlﬁﬁzuzu



ha hi kas’cit ksaham api
jc‘Itu tisthaty akarma—krt
karyate hy avas’ah karma
sarvah prakrti—jair guhaih

SYNONYMS

ha—nor; hi—certainly; kas’cit—anyone; ksaham—a moment; api—also;
jc'Itu—at any time; tisthati—remains; akarma-th—without doing something;
karyate—is forced to do; hi—certainly; avas’ah—helplessly; karma—work;
sarvah—all; prakrti—jaih—born of the modes of material nature; guhaih—by
the qualities.

TRANSLATION

Everyone is forced to act helplessly according to the qualities he has acquired
from the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing
something, not even for a moment.

PURPORT

It is not a question of embodied life, but it is the nature of the soul to be
always active. Without the presence of the spirit soul, the material body
cannot move. The body is only a dead vehicle to be worked by the spirit soul,
which is always active and cannot stop even for a moment. As such, the spirit
soul has to be engaged in the good work of Krsna consciousness, otherwise it
will be engaged in occupations dictated by illusory energy. In contact with
material energy, the spirit soul acquires material modes, and to purify the soul
from such affinities it is necessary to engage in the prescribed duties enjoined
in the s’c‘tstms. But if the soul is engaged in his natural function of Krsna

consciousness, whatever he is able to do is good for him. The
grimad-Bbégavatam (1.5.17) affirms this:

tyaktvc‘t sva—dharmam carahc‘tmbujam hater
bhajcmh apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi



yatra kva vc‘tbhadram abhﬁd amusya kim
k0 Udrtha dpto ’bhajatc‘tm sva—dharmatah

“If someone takes to Krsna consciousness, even though he may not follow
the prescribed duties in the s’c‘tstms or execute the devotional service properly,
and even though he may fall down from the standard, there is no loss or evil
for him. But if he carries out all the injunctions for purification in the s’c‘tstms,
what does it avail him if he is not Krsna conscious?” So the purificatory process
is necessary for reaching this point of Krsna consciousness. Therefore,
sannyc‘tsa, or any purificatory process, is to help reach the ultimate goal of
becoming Krsna conscious, without which everything is considered a failure.

TEXT 6

WWHWWWI
WWﬁwma—vqﬁuau

karmehdriyc‘mi samyamya
ya ciste mahasc‘t smarcm

ihdriyc‘trthc‘m vimﬁdhc‘ttmc‘t
mithyc‘tcc‘trah sa ucyate

SYNONYMS

karma—ihdriyc‘mi—the five working sense organs; samyamya—controlling;
yah—anyone who; aste—remains; mahasc‘t—by the mind; smarah—thinking
of; ihdriya—arthc‘m—sense objects; vimﬁdha—foolish; citmci—soul;
mithyc‘t—c‘tcc‘wah—pretender; sah—he; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

One Who restrains the senses of action but Whose mind dwells on sense
objects certainly deludes himself and is called a pretender.



PURPORT

There are many pretenders who refuse to work in Krsna consciousness but
make a show of meditation, while actually dwelling within the mind upon
sense enjoyment. Such pretenders may also speak on dry philosophy in order
to bluff sophisticated followers, but according to this verse these are the
greatest cheaters. For sense enjoyment one can act in any capacity of the social
order, but if one follows the rules and regulations of his particular status, he
can make gradual progress in purifying his existence. But he who makes a show
of being a yogi while actually searching for the objects of sense gratification
must be called the greatest cheater, even though he sometimes speaks of
philosophy. His knowledge has no value, because the effects of such a sinful
man’s knowledge are taken away by the illusory energy of the Lord. Such a
pretender’s mind is always impure, and therefore his show of yogic meditation
has no value whatsoever.

TEXT 7

Wmﬁammﬁﬁm
ﬁﬁﬁzmmmﬁzaﬁﬁmﬁueu

yas tv ihdriyc‘mi mahasc‘t
hiyamyc‘trabhate ’rjuha
karmehdriyaih karma—yogam
asaktah sa vis’isyate

SYNONYMS

yah—one who; tu—but; ihdriyc‘mi—the senses; mahasc‘t—by the mind;
hiyamya—regulating; cirabhate—begins; arjuha—O Arjuna;

karma-ihdriyaih—by the active sense organs; karma—yogam—devotion;
asaktah—without attachment; sah—he; vis’isyate—is by far the better.



TRANSLATION

On the other hand, if a sincere person tries to control the active senses by
the mind and begins karma-yoga [in Krsna consciousness] Without attachment,
he is by far superior.

PURPORT

Instead of becoming a pseudo transcendentalist for the sake of wanton
living and sense enjoyment, it is far better to remain in one’s own business and
execute the purpose of life, which is to get free from material bondage and
enter into the kingdom of God. The prime svc‘wtha-gati, or goal of self-interest,
is to reach Visnu. The whole institution of vama and cis’mma is designed to
help us reach this goal of life. A householder can also reach this destination by
regulated service in Krsna consciousness. For self-realization, one can live a
controlled life, as prescribed in the s’c‘tstms, and continue carrying out his
business without attachment, and in that way make progress. A sincere person
who follows this method is far better situated than the false pretender who
adopts show-bottle spiritualism to cheat the innocent public. A sincere
sweeper in the street is far better than the charlatan meditator who meditates
only for the sake of making a living.

TEXT 8

Wwﬁﬁﬁwﬁeﬁwn
:Rimﬁrﬁaﬁﬁqﬁleﬁwn‘wuwu

hiyatam kum karma tvam

karma jyc‘Iyo hy akarmahah
s’arira—yc‘ttrc‘tpi ca te

ha prasiddhyed akarmahah



SYNONYMS

hiyatam—prescribed; kuru—do; karma—duties; tvam—you; karma—work;
jyc‘tyah—better; hi—certainly; akarmahah—than no work; s’arira—bodily;
yc‘ttrc‘t—maintenance; api—even; ca—also; te—your; ha—never;
prasiddhyet—is effected; akarmahah—without work.

TRANSLATION

Perform your prescribed duty, for doing so is better than not working. One
cannot even maintain one’s physical body Without work.

PURPORT

There are many pseudo meditators who misrepresent themselves as
belonging to high parentage, and great professional men who falsely pose that
they have sacrificed everything for the sake of advancement in spiritual life.
Lord Krsna did not want Arjuna to become a pretender. Rather, the Lord
desired that Arjuna perform his prescribed duties as set forth for ksatriyas.
Arjuna was a householder and a military general, and therefore it was better
for him to remain as such and perform his religious duties as prescribed for the
householder ksati‘iya. Such activities gradually cleanse the heart of a mundane
man and free him from material contamination. So-called renunciation for the
purpose of maintenance is never approved by the Lord, nor by any religious
scripture. After all, one has to maintain one’s body and soul together by some
work. Work should not be given up capriciously, without purification of
materialistic propensities. Anyone who is in the material world is certainly
possessed of the impure propensity for lording it over material nature, or, in
other words, for sense gratification. Such polluted propensities have to be
cleared. Without doing so, through prescribed duties, one should never
attempt to become a so-called transcendentalist, renouncing work and living
at the cost of others.



TEXT 9

WWSWWﬁW-ﬂﬁzl
aeaiaﬁliﬁﬁuwmwusu

yajﬁdrthc‘tt karmaho ’hyatra

loko ’yam karma—bahdhahah

tad—artham karma kauhteya
mukta—sahgah samacara

SYNONYMS

yajﬁa-arthc‘tt—done only for the sake of Yajﬁa, or Visnu; karmahah—than
work; anyatra—otherwise; lokah—world; ayam—this;
karma-bahdhahah—bondage by work; tat—of Him; artham—for the sake;
karma—work; kauhteya—O son of Kunti; mukta-sahgah—liberated from
association; samacara—do perfectly.

TRANSLATION

Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work
causes bondage in this material world. Therefore, 0 son of Kunti, perform your
prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you Will always remain
free from bondage.

PURPORT

Since one has to work even for the simple maintenance of the body, the
prescribed duties for a particular social position and quality are so made that
that purpose can be fulfilled. Yajﬁa means Lord Visnu, or sacrificial
performances. All sacrificial performances also are meant for the satisfaction
of Lord Visnu. The Vedas enjoin: yajﬁo vai visuuh. In other words, the same
purpose is served whether one performs prescribed yajﬁas or directly serves
Lord Visnu. Krsna consciousness is therefore performance of yajﬁa as it is



prescribed in this verse. The vamas’mma institution also aims at satisfying
Lord Visnu. Vamc‘ts’ramc‘tcc‘wavatc‘t puruseha parah pumah/ visuur circ‘tdhyate
( Vzlsrzu Purina 3.8.8).

Therefore one has to work for the satisfaction of Visnu. Any other work
done in this material world will be a cause of bondage, for both good and evil
work have their reactions, and any reaction binds the performer. Therefore,
one has to work in Krsna consciousness to satisfy Krsna (or Visnu); and while
performing such activities one is in a liberated stage. This is the great art of
doing work, and in the beginning this process requires very expert guidance.
One should therefore act very diligently, under the expert guidance of a
devotee of Lord Krsna, or under the direct instruction of Lord Krsna Himself
(under whom Arjuna had the opportunity to work). Nothing should be
performed for sense gratification, but everything should be done for the
satisfaction of Krsna. This practice will not only save one from the reaction of
work, but also gradually elevate one to transcendental loving service of the
Lord, which alone can raise one to the kingdom of God.

TEXT 10

Wzmzagrgﬁaﬁmﬁrzl
aﬁﬁmﬁmgﬁwaihﬁawueou

saha—yajﬁc‘th prajc‘th srstvc‘t
pmovc‘tca prajcipatih
aheha prasavisyadhvam
esa v0 ’stv ista—kc‘tma—dhuk

SYNONYMS

saha—along with; yajﬁc‘th—sacrifices; prajc‘th—generations; srstvc‘t—creating;
purc‘t—anciently; uvc‘tca—said; prajc‘t—patih—the Lord of creatures; cmeha—by
this; prasavisyadhvam—be more and more prosperous; esah—this; vah—your;
astu—let it be; ista—of all desirable things; kama—dhuk—bestower.



TRANSLATION

In the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth generations
of men and demigods, along With sacrifices for Visnu, and blessed them by
saying, “Be thou happy by this yajﬁa [sacrifice] because its performance Will
bestow upon you everything desirable for living happily and achieving
liberation.”

PURPORT

The material creation by the Lord of creatures (Visnu) is a chance offered
to the conditioned souls to come back home—back to Godhead. All living
entities within the material creation are conditioned by material nature
because of their forgetfulness of their relationship to Visnu, or Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedic principles are to help us
understand this eternal relation, as it is stated in the Bhagavad—gitc‘t: vedais’ ca
sarvair aham eva vedyah. The Lord says that the purpose of the Vedas is to
understand Him. In the Vedic hymns it is said: patim vis’vasyc‘ttmes’varam.
Therefore, the Lord of the living entities is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Visnu. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also (2.4.20) Srila Sukadeva

Gosvami describes the Lord as pati in so many ways:

s’riyah patir yajﬁa—patih prajc‘t—patir

dhiyc‘tm patir loka—patir dharc‘I-patih
patir gatis’ cc‘mdhaka—vrsni—sc‘ttvatc‘tm
prasidatdm me bhagavc‘m satc‘tm patih

The prajc't-pati is Lord Visnu, and He is the Lord of all living creatures, all
worlds, and all beauties, and the protector of everyone. The Lord created this
material world to enable the conditioned souls to learn how to perform yajﬁas
(sacrifices) for the satisfaction of Visnu, so that while in the material world
they can live very comfortably without anxiety and after finishing the present
material body they can enter into the kingdom of God. That is the whole
program for the conditioned soul. By performance of yajﬁa, the conditioned



souls gradually become Krsna conscious and become godly in all respects. In
the Age of Kali, the sahkirtaha—yajﬁa (the chanting of the names of God) is
recommended by the Vedic scriptures, and this transcendental system was
introduced by Lord Caitanya for the deliverance of all men in this age.
Sahkirtaha-yajﬁa and Krsna consciousness go well together. Lord Krsna in His
devotional form (as Lord Caitanya) is mentioned in the grimad-Bbégavatam
(11.5.32) as follows, with special reference to the sahkirtaha—yajﬁa:

krsna—vamam tvisc‘tkrsnam

sahgopahgastra—parsadam

yajﬁaih sahkirtana—prciyair
yajcmti hi su—medhasah

“In this Age of Kali, people who are endowed with sufficient intelligence
will worship the Lord, who is accompanied by His associates, by performance
of sahkirtaha-yajﬁa.” Other yajﬁas prescribed in the Vedic literatures are not
easy to perform in this Age of Kali, but the sahkirtaha-yajﬁa is easy and
sublime for all purposes, as recommended in Bhagavad-gitc‘t also (9.14).

TEXT 11

Wﬁwmau
Wwwﬁuzwamau ??ll

devc‘m bhavayatc‘meha

te devc‘t bhavaycmtu vah
parasparam bhavayahtah
s’reyah param avc‘tpsyatha

SYNONYMS

devc‘m—demigods; bhavayatc‘t—having pleased; cmeha—by this sacrifice;
te—those; devc‘th—demigods; bhavayahtu—will please; vah—you;
parasparam—mutually; bhavayahtah—pleasing one another;
s’reyah—benediction; param—the supreme; avc‘tpsyatha—you will achieve.



TRANSLATION

The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, Will also please you, and thus, by
cooperation between men and demigods, prosperity Will reign for all.

PURPORT

The demigods are empowered administrators of material affairs. The supply
of air, light, water and all other benedictions for maintaining the body and
soul of every living entity is entrusted to the demigods, who are innumerable
assistants in different parts of the body of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Their pleasures and displeasures are dependent on the performance
of yajﬁas by the human being. Some of the yajﬁas are meant to satisfy
particular demigods; but even in so doing, Lord Visnu is worshiped in all yajﬁas
as the chief beneficiary. It is stated also in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t that Krsna
Himself is the beneficiary of all kinds of yajﬁas: bhoktc‘wam yajﬁa—tapasc‘tm.
Therefore, ultimate satisfaction of the yajﬁa-pati is the chief purpose of all
yajﬁas. When these yajﬁas are perfectly performed, naturally the demigods in
charge of the different departments of supply are pleased, and there is no
scarcity in the supply of natural products.

Performance of yajﬁas has many side benefits, ultimately leading to
liberation from material bondage. By performance of yajﬁas, all activities
become purified, as it is stated in the Vedas: ahara—s’uddhau sattUa—s’uddhih
sattva—s’uddhau dhruvc‘t smrtih smrti—lambhe sarvagrahthim‘tm vipramoksah. By
performance of yajﬁa one’s eatables become sanctified, and by eating sanctified
foodstuffs one’s very existence becomes purified; by the purification of
existence finer tissues in the memory become sanctified, and when memory is
sanctified one can think of the path of liberation, and all these combined
together lead to Krsna consciousness, the great necessity of present-day
society.

TEXT 12



Wéiamaraﬁwnﬁam
Wﬁiwﬁiﬁﬁwazunu

istc‘m bhogc‘m hi v0 devc‘t
dasycmte yajﬁa-bhc‘witc‘th
tair dattc‘m apradciyaibhyo
yo bhuhkte steha eva sah

SYNONYMS

istc‘m—desired; bhogc‘m—necessities of life; hi—certainly; vah—unto you;
devc‘th—the demigods; dasycmte—will award; yajﬁa-bhc‘witcih—being satisfied by
the performance of sacrifices; taih—by them; dattc'm—things given;
apradc‘tya—without offering; ebhyah—to these demigods; yah—he who;
bhuhkte—enjoys; stehah—thief; eva—certainly; sah—he.

TRANSLATION

In charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being satisfied by
the performance of yajﬁa [sacrifice], Will supply all necessities to you. But he
Who enjoys such gifts Without offering them to the demigods in return is
certainly a thief.

PURPORT

The demigods are authorized supplying agents on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Visnu. Therefore, they must be satisfied by the
performance of prescribed yajﬁas. In the Vedas, there are different kinds of
yajﬁas prescribed for different kinds of demigods, but all are ultimately offered
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For one who cannot understand what
the Personality of Godhead is, sacrifice to the demigods is recommended.
According to the different material qualities of the persons concerned,
different types of yajﬁas are recommended in the Vedas. Worship of different
demigods is also on the same basis—namely, according to different qualities.



For example, the meat-eaters are recommended to worship the goddess Kali,
the ghastly form of material nature, and before the goddess the sacrifice of
animals is recommended. But for those who are in the mode of goodness, the
transcendental worship of Visnu is recommended. But ultimately all yajﬁas are
meant for gradual promotion to the transcendental position. For ordinary
men, at least five yajﬁas, known as pahca—mahc‘t—yajﬁa, are necessary.

One should know, however, that all the necessities of life that the human
society requires are supplied by the demigod agents of the Lord. No one can
manufacture anything. Take, for example, all the eatables of human society.
These eatables include grains, fruits, vegetables, milk, sugar, etc., for the
persons in the mode of goodness, and also eatables for the nonvegetarians, like
meats, none of which can be manufactured by men. Then again, take for
example heat, light, water, air, etc., which are also necessities of life—none of
them can be manufactured by the human society. Without the Supreme Lord,
there can be no profuse sunlight, moonlight, rainfall, breeze, etc., without
which no one can live. Obviously, our life is dependent on supplies from the
Lord. Even for our manufacturing enterprises, we require so many raw
materials like metal, sulphur, mercury, manganese, and so many essentials—all
of which are supplied by the agents of the Lord, with the purpose that we
should make proper use of them to keep ourselves fit and healthy for the
purpose of self-realization, leading to the ultimate goal of life, namely,
liberation from the material struggle for existence. This aim of life is attained
by performance of yajﬁas. If we forget the purpose of human life and simply
take supplies from the agents of the Lord for sense gratification and become
more and more entangled in material existence, which is not the purpose of
creation, certainly we become thieves, and therefore we are punished by the
laws of material nature. A society of thieves can never be happy, because they
have no aim in life. The gross materialist thieves have no ultimate goal of life.
They are simply directed to sense gratification; nor do they have knowledge of
how to perform yajﬁas. Lord Caitanya, however, inaugurated the easiest
performance of yajﬁa, namely the sahkirtaha-yajﬁa, which can be performed by
anyone in the world who accepts the principles of Krsna consciousness.



TEXT 13

W:WWHEIW:
Iﬁﬁéa‘dmﬁﬁmuisu

yajﬁa—s’istc‘ts’ihah sahto
mucyahte sarva—kilbisaih
bhuﬁjate te tv agham papa
ye paccmty citma—kc‘trahc‘tt

SYNONYMS

yajﬁa-s’ista—of food taken after performance of yajﬁa; as’ihah—eaters;
santah—the devotees; mucycmte—get relief; sarva—all kinds of;
kilbisaih—from sins; bhuﬁjate—enjoy; te—they; tu—but; agham—grievous
sins; papah—sinners; ye—who; paccmti—prepare food; citma-kc‘wahc‘tt—for
sense enjoyment.

TRANSLATION

The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat
food Which is offered first for sacrifice. Others, Who prepare food for personal
sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.

PURPORT

The devotees of the Supreme Lord, or the persons who are in Krsna
consciousness, are called santas, and they are always in love with the Lord as it
is described in the Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.38):
premaﬁjaha—cchurita-bhakti—Uilocaheha santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayahti. The
santas, being always in a compact of love with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Govinda (the giver of all pleasures), or Mukunda (the giver of
liberation), or Krsna (the all-attractive person), cannot accept anything
without first offering it to the Supreme Person. Therefore, such devotees



always perform yajﬁas in different modes of devotional service, such as
s’ravaham, kirtcmam, smaraham, arccmam, etc., and these performances of
yajﬁas keep them always aloof from all kinds of contamination of sinful
association in the material world. Others, who prepare food for self or sense
gratification, are not only thieves but also the eaters of all kinds of sins. How
can a person be happy if he is both a thief and sinful? It is not possible.
Therefore, in order for people to become happy in all respects, they must be
taught to perform the easy process of sahkirtaha-yajﬁa, in full Krsna
consciousness. Otherwise, there can be no peace or happiness in the world.

TEXT 14

WWWM
Wilﬁﬁzmtllwll

anhad bhavcmti thZtc‘mi
parjcmyc‘td anha-sambhavah

yajﬁc‘td bhavati parjcmyo
yajﬁah karma—samudbhavah

SYNONYMS

cmm'tt—from grains; bhavcmti—grow; bhﬁtc'mi—the material bodies;
parjcmydt—from rains; anha—of food grains; sambhavah—production;
yajﬁc'tt—from the performance of sacrifice; bhavati—becomes possible;
parjanyah—rain; yajhah—performance of yajﬁa; karma—prescribed duties;
samudbhavah—born of.

TRANSLATION

All living bodies subsist on food grains, Which are produced from rains.
Rains are produced by performance of yajﬁa [sacrifice], and yajﬁa is born of
prescribed duties.



PURPORT

Srila Baladeva Vidyabhﬂsana, a great commentator on the Bhagavad-gitc‘t,
writes as follows: ye ihdrady—ahgatayc‘wasthitam yajﬁam sarves’varam visuum
abhyarcya tac—chesam as’hcmti teha tad deha—yc‘ttrc‘tm sampc‘tdayahti, te santah
sarves’varasya yajﬁa-pmusasya bhaktc‘th sarva—kilbisair ahadi—kc‘tla—vivrddhair
citmc‘mubhava—pmti bahdhakair hikhilaih papair vimucyahte. The Supreme Lord,
who is known as the yajﬁa-pm'usa, or the personal beneficiary of all sacrifices,
is the master of all the demigods, who serve Him as the different limbs of the
body serve the whole. Demigods like Indra, Candra and Varuna are appointed
officers who manage material affairs, and the Vedas direct sacrifices to satisfy
these demigods so that they may be pleased to supply air, light and water
sufficiently to produce food grains. When Lord Krsna is worshiped, the
demigods, who are different limbs of the Lord, are also automatically
worshiped; therefore there is no separate need to worship the demigods. For
this reason, the devotees of the Lord, who are in Krsna consciousness, offer
food to Krsna and then eat—a process which nourishes the body spiritually. By
such action not only are past sinful reactions in the body vanquished, but the
body becomes immunized to all contamination of material nature. When there
is an epidemic disease, an antiseptic vaccine protects a person from the attack
of such an epidemic. Similarly, food offered to Lord Visnu and then taken by
us makes us sufficiently resistant to material affection, and one who is
accustomed to this practice is called a devotee of the Lord. Therefore, a person
in Krsna consciousness, who eats only food offered to Krsna, can counteract all
reactions of past material infections, which are impediments to the progress of
self-realization. On the other hand, one who does not do so continues to
increase the volume of sinful action, and this prepares the next body to
resemble hogs and dogs, to suffer the resultant reactions of all sins. The
material world is full of contaminations, and one who is immunized by
accepting prasc‘tdam of the Lord (food offered to Visnu) is saved from the
attack, whereas one who does not do so becomes subjected to contamination.

Food grains or vegetables are factually eatables. The human being eats
different kinds of food grains, vegetables, fruits, etc., and the animals eat the



refuse of the food grains and vegetables, grass, plants, etc. Human beings who
are accustomed to eating meat and flesh must also depend on the production of
vegetation in order to eat the animals. Therefore, ultimately, we have to
depend on the production of the field and not on the production of big
factories. The field production is due to sufficient rain from the sky, and such
rains are controlled by demigods like Indra, sun, moon, etc., and they are all
servants of the Lord. The Lord can be satisfied by sacrifices; therefore, one
who cannot perform them will find himself in scarcity—that is the law of
nature. Yajﬁa, specifically the sahkirtaha-yajﬁa prescribed for this age, must
therefore be performed to save us at least from scarcity of food supply.

TEXT 15

ﬁaﬁﬁﬁlﬁ'wWI
Whaaﬁeiaﬁqﬁrﬁattuwu

karma brahmodbhavam viddhi
brahmaksara—samudbhavam
tasmdt sarva-gatam brahma
hityam yajﬁe pratisthitam

SYNONYMS

karma—work; brahma—from the Vedas; udbhavam—produced; viddhi—you
should know; brahma—the Vedas; aksara—from the Supreme Brahman
(Personality of Godhead); samudbhavam—directly manifested;
tasmc‘It—therefore; sarva—gatam—all-pervading; brahma—transcendence;
hityam—eternally; yajﬁe—in sacrifice; pratisthitam—situated.

TRANSLATION

Regulated activities are prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas are directly
manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Consequently the
all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated in acts of sacrifice.



PURPORT

Yajﬁc'wtha-karma, or the necessity of work for the satisfaction of Krsna only,
is more expressly stated in this verse. If we have to work for the satisfaction of
the yajﬁa-pm'usa, Visnu, then we must find out the direction of work in
Brahman, or the transcendental Vedas. The Vedas are therefore codes of
working directions. Anything performed without the direction of the Vedas is
called Uikarma, or unauthorized or sinful work. Therefore, one should always
take direction from the Vedas to be saved from the reaction of work. As one
has to work in ordinary life by the direction of the state, one similarly has to
work under direction of the supreme state of the Lord. Such directions in the
Vedas are directly manifested from the breathing of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. It is said, asya mahato bhﬁtasya his’vasitam etad yad Tg—vedo
yajm-vedah samavedo ’tharvc‘mgirasah. “The four Vedas—namely the Rg Veda,
Yajm Veda, Sama Veda, and Atharva Veda—are all emanations from the
breathing of the great Personality of Godhead.” (Brbad—érarzyaka Upamhad
4.5.11) The Lord, being omnipotent, can speak by breathing air, for as it is
confirmed in the Bmhma-samhita, the Lord has the omnipotence to perform
through each of His senses the actions of all other senses. In other words, the
Lord can speak through His breathing, and He can impregnate by His eyes. In
fact, it is said that He glanced over material nature and thus fathered all living
entities. After creating or impregnating the conditioned souls into the womb
of material nature, He gave His directions in the Vedic wisdom as to how such
conditioned souls can return home, back to Godhead. We should always
remember that the conditioned souls in material nature are all eager for
material enjoyment. But the Vedic directions are so made that one can satisfy
one’s perverted desires, then return to Godhead, having finished his so-called
enjoyment. It is a chance for the conditioned souls to attain liberation;
therefore the conditioned souls must try to follow the process of yajﬁa by
becoming Krsna conscious. Even those who have not followed the Vedic
injunctions may adopt the principles of Krsna consciousness, and that will take
the place of performance of Vedic yajﬁas, or karmas.



TEXT 16

Hainaﬁiaaakaﬁaﬁaa‘iem I
Waivméaaiaﬁrueeu

evam pravartitam cakram
hahuvartayatiha yah
aghc‘tyur ihdriyc‘m‘tmo
mogham pc‘mha sa jivati

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; pravartitam—established by the Vedas; cakram—cycle; ha—does
not; ahuvartayati—adopt; iha—in this life; yah—one who; agha-c‘Iyuh—whose
life is full of sins; ihdriya-ammah—satisfied in sense gratification;
mogham—uselessly; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha (Arjuna); sah—he; jivati—lives.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, one Who does not follow in human life the cycle of sacrifice
thus established by the Vedas certainly leads a life full of sin. Living only for
the satisfaction of the senses, such a person lives in vain.

PURPORT

The mammonist philosophy of “work very hard and enjoy sense
gratification” is condemned herein by the Lord. Therefore, for those who want
to enjoy this material world, the above-mentioned cycle of performing yajﬁas is
absolutely necessary. One who does not follow such regulations is living a very
risky life, being condemned more and more. By nature’s law, this human form
of life is specifically meant for self-realization, in either of the three
ways—namely karma-yoga, jﬁc‘ma—yoga, or bhakti—yoga. There is no necessity of
rigidly following the performances of the prescribed yajﬁas for the



transcendentalists who are above Vice and Virtue; but those who are engaged
in sense gratification require purification by the above mentioned cycle of
yajﬁa performances. There are different kinds of activities. Those who are not
Krsna conscious are certainly engaged in sensory consciousness; therefore they
need to execute pious work. The yajﬁa system is planned in such a way that
sensory conscious persons may satisfy their desires without becoming
entangled in the reaction of sense-gratificatory work. The prosperity of the
world depends not on our own efforts but on the background arrangement of
the Supreme Lord, directly carried out by the demigods. Therefore, the yajﬁas
are directly aimed at the particular demigods mentioned in the Vedas.
Indirectly, it is the practice of Krsna consciousness, because when one masters
the performance of yajﬁas one is sure to become Krsna conscious. But if by
performing yajﬁas one does not become Krsna conscious, such principles are
counted as only moral codes. One should not, therefore, limit his progress only
to the point of moral codes, but should transcend them, to attain Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 17

Wmawu
Wameﬁﬁﬁaﬁumu

yas tv citma—ratir eva syc‘td
citma—trptas’ ca mc‘mavah
citmcmy eva ca scmtustas
tasya karyam ha vidyate

SYNONYMS

yah—one who; tu—but; citma-Tatih—taking pleasure in the self;
eva—certainly; syc‘It—remains; citma—trptah—self-illuminated; ca—and;
mahavah—a man; citmcmi—in himself; eva—only; ca—and;
sahtustah—perfectly satiated; tasya—his; karyam—duty; ha—does not;



vidyate—exist.

TRANSLATION

But for one Who takes pleasure in the self, Whose human life is one of
self-realization, and Who is satisfied in the self only, fully satiated—for him
there is no duty.

PURPORT

A person who is fully Krsna conscious, and is fully satisfied by his acts in
Krsna consciousness, no longer has any duty to perform. Due to his being
Krsna conscious, all impiety within is instantly cleansed, an effect of many,
many thousands of yajﬁa performances. By such clearing of consciousness, one
becomes fully confident of his eternal position in relationship with the
Supreme. His duty thus becomes self-illuminated by the grace of the Lord, and
therefore he no longer has any obligations to the Vedic injunctions. Such a
Krsna conscious person is no longer interested in material activities and no
longer takes pleasure in material arrangements like wine, women and similar
infatuations.

TEXT 18

ﬁamﬁmﬁmﬁzwm
HWWWWM II F H

haiva tasya krtehc‘trtho
hakrteheha kas’ccma
ha cc‘tsya sarva—bhﬁtesu
kas’cid artha—vyapc‘ts’myah
SYNONYMS

ha—never; eva—certainly; tasya—his; krteha—by discharge of duty;



arthah—purpose; ha—nor; akrteha—without discharge of duty; iha—in this
world; kas’caha—whatever; ha—never; ca—and; asya—of him;
sarva—bhﬁtesu—among all living beings; kas’cit—any; artha—purpose;
vyapc‘ts’rayah—taking shelter of.

TRANSLATION

A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his
prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Nor has he
any need to depend on any other living being.

PURPORT

A self-realized man is no longer obliged to perform any prescribed duty,
save and except activities in Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is not
inactivity either, as will be explained in the following verses. A Krsna
conscious man does not take shelter of any person—man or demigod.
Whatever he does in Krsna consciousness is sufficient in the discharge of his
obligation.

TEXT 19

Wszﬁml
mmmwnmu

tasmc‘td asaktah satatam

karyam karma samacara

asakto hy cicarcm karma
param cipnoti pﬁrusah

SYNONYMS

tasmc‘It—therefore; asaktah—without attachment; satatam—constantly;
karyam—as duty; karma—work; samacara—perform; asaktah—unattached;



hi—certainly; cicarcm—performing; karma—work; param—the Supreme;
cipnoti—achieves; pﬁrusah—a man.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, Without being attached to the fruits of activities, one should act
as a matter of duty, for by working Without attachment one attains the
Supreme.

PURPORT

The Supreme is the Personality of Godhead for the devotees, and liberation
for the impersonalist. A person, therefore, acting for Krsna, or in Krsna
consciousness, under proper guidance and without attachment to the result of
the work, is certainly making progress toward the supreme goal of life. Arjuna
is told that he should fight in the Battle of Kuruksetra for the interest of Krsna
because Krsna wanted him to fight. To be a good man or a nonviolent man is a
personal attachment, but to act on behalf of the Supreme is to act without
attachment for the result. That is perfect action of the highest degree,
recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna.

Vedic rituals, like prescribed sacrifices, are performed for purification of
impious activities that were performed in the field of sense gratification. But
action in Krsna consciousness is transcendental to the reactions of good or evil
work. A Krsna conscious person has no attachment for the result but acts on
behalf of Krsna alone. He engages in all kinds of activities, but is completely
nonattached.

TEXT 20

memmu
WWIIQOH

karmahaiva hi samsiddhim
asthitc‘t jahakc‘tdayah



loka—sahgraham evc‘tpi
sampas’yah kartum arhasi

SYNONYMS

karmahc‘t—by work; eva—even; hi—certainly; samsiddhim—in perfection;
cisthitc‘th—situated; jahaka—c‘tdayah—Janaka and other kings;
loka—sahgraham—the people in general; eva api—also;
sampas’yah—considering; kartum—to act; arhasi—you deserve.

TRANSLATION

Kings such as Janaka attained perfection solely by performance of prescribed
duties. Therefore, just for the sake of educating the people in general, you
should perform your work.

PURPORT

Kings like ]anaka were all self-realized souls; consequently they had no
obligation to perform the prescribed duties in the Vedas. Nonetheless they
performed all prescribed activities just to set examples for the people in
general. ]anaka was the father of Sita and father-in-law of Lord Sri Rama.
Being a great devotee of the Lord, he was transcendentally situated, but
because he was the king of Mithila (a subdivision of Bihar province in India),
he had to teach his subjects how to perform prescribed duties. Lord Krsna and
Arjuna, the Lord’s eternal friend, had no need to fight in the Battle of
Kuruksetra, but they fought to teach people in general that Violence is also
necessary in a situation where good arguments fail. Before the Battle of
Kuruksetra, every effort was made to avoid the war, even by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, but the other party was determined to fight. 80 for
such a right cause, there is a necessity for fighting. Although one who is
situated in Krsna consciousness may not have any interest in the world, he still
works to teach the public how to live and how to act. Experienced persons in
Krsna consciousness can act in such a way that others will follow, and this is



explained in the following verse.

TEXT 21

WWEWI
HWWWHQ?"

yad yad cicarati s’resthas
tat tad evetaro jcmah

sa yat pramc‘mam kurute
lokas tad ahuvartate

SYNONYMS

yat yat—whatever; cicarati—he does; s’resthah—a respectable leader; tat—that;
tat—and that alone; eva—certainly; itarah—common; jcmah—person;
sah—he; yat—whichever; pramc‘mam—example; kurute—does perform;
lokah—all the world; tat—that; ahuvartate—follows in the footsteps.

TRANSLATION

Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow. And Whatever
standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the world pursues.

PURPORT

People in general always require a leader who can teach the public by
practical behavior. A leader cannot teach the public to stop smoking if he
himself smokes. Lord Caitanya said that a teacher should behave properly
before he begins teaching. One who teaches in that way is called cicc'n‘ya, or the
ideal teacher. Therefore, a teacher must follow the principles of s’c'tsti'a
(scripture) to teach the common man. The teacher cannot manufacture rules
against the principles of revealed scriptures. The revealed scriptures, like
Mahu-samhita and similar others, are considered the standard books to be



followed by human society. Thus the leader’s teaching should be based on the
principles of such standard s’c‘tstms. One who desires to improve himself must
follow the standard rules as they are practiced by the great teachers. The
Srimad-Bhagavatam also affirms that one should follow in the footsteps of great
devotees, and that is the way of progress on the path of spiritual realization.
The king or the executive head of a state, the father and the school teacher are
all considered to be natural leaders of the innocent people in general. All such
natural leaders have a great responsibility to their dependents; therefore they
must be conversant with standard books of moral and spiritual codes.

TEXT 22

ﬁﬁmﬁﬁrmﬁgmﬁﬁm
Wasiqaaﬁfﬁiuqau

ha me pc‘wthc‘tsti kartavyam
trisu lokesu kiﬁcaha
hc‘mavc‘tptam avaptavyam
varta eva ca karmahi

SYNONYMS

ha—not; me—Mine; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha; asti—there is;
kartavyam—prescribed duty; trisu—in the three; lokesu—planetary systems;
kiﬁcaha—any; ha—nothing; ahavc‘tptam—wanted; avc‘tptavyam—to be gained;
varte—I am engaged; eva—certainly; ca—also; karmahi—in prescribed duty.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, there is no work prescribed for Me Within all the three
planetary systems. Nor am I in want of anything, nor have I a need to obtain
anything—and yet I am engaged in prescribed duties.

PURPORT



The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described in the Vedic literatures
as follows:

tam is’varc‘mc‘tm paramam mahes’varam

tam devatc‘mc‘tm paramam ca daivatam
patim patinc‘tm paramam parastc‘td
vidama devam bhuvahes’am idyam

ha tasya karyam karaham ca vidyate
ha tat—samas’ cc‘tbhyadhikas’ ca drs’yate
parc‘tsya s’aktir vividhaiva s’rﬁyate
svc‘tbhc‘wiki jﬁc‘ma—bala—kriyc‘t ca

“The Supreme Lord is the controller of all other controllers, and He is the
greatest of all the diverse planetary leaders. Everyone is under His control. All
entities are delegated with particular power only by the Supreme Lord; they
are not supreme themselves. He is also worshipable by all demigods and is the
supreme director of all directors. Therefore, He is transcendental to all kinds
of material leaders and controllers and is worshipable by all. There is no one
greater than Him, and He is the supreme cause of all causes.

“He does not possess bodily form like that of an ordinary living entity.
There is no difference between His body and His soul. He is absolute. All His
senses are transcendental. Any one of His senses can perform the action of
any other sense. Therefore, no one is greater than Him or equal to Him. His
potencies are multifarious, and thus His deeds are automatically performed as a
natural sequence.” (gvetéivatara Upam'gaa 6.7—8)

Since everything is in full opulence in the Personality of Godhead and is
existing in full truth, there is no duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to perform. One who must receive the results of work has some designated
duty, but one who has nothing to achieve within the three planetary systems
certainly has no duty. And yet Lord Krsna is engaged on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra as the leader of the ksati'iyas because the ksati'iyas are duty-bound
to give protection to the distressed. Although He is above all the regulations of
the revealed scriptures, He does not do anything that violates the revealed



scriptures.

TEXT 23

ﬁﬁmﬁaﬁdaﬁﬁmﬁml
maaiaaﬁngwwéaahmmau

yadi hy aham ha varteyam
jc‘Itu karmahy atcmdritah
mama vartmc‘muvartahte

manusyc‘th pc‘wtha sarvas’ah

SYNONYMS

yadi—if; hi—certainly; aham—I; ha—do not; varteyam—thus engage;
jc'ttu—ever; karmahi—in the performance of prescribed duties;
atcmdritah—with great care; mama—My; vartma—path; ahuvartahte—would
follow; manusyc‘th—all men; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha; sarvas’ah—in all respects.

TRANSLATION

For if I ever failed to engage in carefully performing prescribed duties, 0
Partha, certainly all men would follow My path.

PURPORT

In order to keep the balance of social tranquillity for progress in spiritual
life, there are traditional family usages meant for every civilized man.
Although such rules and regulations are for the conditioned souls and not
Lord Krsna, because He descended to establish the principles of religion He
followed the prescribed rules. Otherwise, common men would follow in His
footsteps, because He is the greatest authority. From the Srimad-Bhagavatam it
is understood that Lord Krsna was performing all the religious duties at home
and out of home, as required of a householder.



TEXT 24

magﬁﬁaﬁmagqiaﬁﬁml
amamﬁmzmzuaeu

utsideym ime lokc‘t
ha kmyc‘tm karma ced aham
sahkamsya ca kartc‘t syc‘tm
upahanyc‘tm imc‘th prajc‘th

SYNONYMS

utsideyuh—would be put into ruin; ime—all these; lokc‘th—worlds; ha—not;
kmyc‘tm—I perform; karma—prescribed duties; cet—if; aham—I;
sahkarasya—of unwanted population; ca—and; kartc‘t—creator; syc‘Im—would
be; upahanyc‘tm—would destroy; imc‘th—all these; prajc‘th—living entities.

TRANSLATION

If I did not perform prescribed duties, all these worlds would be put to
ruination. I would be the cause of creating unwanted population, and I would
thereby destroy the peace of all living beings.

PURPORT

Vama-sahkam is unwanted population which disturbs the peace of the
general society. In order to check this social disturbance, there are prescribed
rules and regulations by which the population can automatically become
peaceful and organized for spiritual progress in life. When Lord Krsna
descends, naturally He deals with such rules and regulations in order to
maintain the prestige and necessity of such important performances. The Lord
is the father of all living entities, and if the living entities are misguided,
indirectly the responsibility goes to the Lord. Therefore, whenever there is



general disregard of regulative principles, the Lord Himself descends and
corrects the society. We should, however, note carefully that although we have
to follow in the footsteps of the Lord, we still have to remember that we
cannot imitate Him. Following and imitating are not on the same level. We
cannot imitate the Lord by lifting Govardhana Hill, as the Lord did in His
childhood. It is impossible for any human being. We have to follow His
instructions, but we may not imitate Him at any time. The grimad-Bbégavatam

(10.33.30—31) affirms:

haitat samacarej jc‘Itu
mahasc‘tpi hy anis’varah
vihas’yaty cicarcm maudhyc‘td
yathc‘t ’rudro ’bdhi-jam visam

is’varc‘mc‘tm vacah satyam
tathaivc‘tcaritam kvacit
tesc‘tm yat sva—vaco-yuktam
buddhimc‘tms tat samacaret

“One should simply follow the instructions of the Lord and His empowered
servants. Their instructions are all good for us, and any intelligent person will
perform them as instructed. However, one should guard against trying to
imitate their actions. One should not try to drink the ocean of poison in
imitation of Lord Siva.”

We should always consider the position of the is’vai'as, or those who can
actually control the movements of the sun and moon, as superior. Without
such power, one cannot imitate the is’vai'as, who are superpowerful. Lord Siva
drank poison to the extent of swallowing an ocean, but if any common man
tries to drink even a fragment of such poison, he will be killed. There are many
pseudo devotees of Lord Siva who want to indulge in smoking gaﬁjc't
(marijuana) and similar intoxicating drugs, forgetting that by so imitating the
acts of Lord Siva they are calling death very near. Similarly, there are some
pseudo devotees of Lord Krsna who prefer to imitate the Lord in His Tasa-lila,
or dance of love, forgetting their inability to lift Govardhana Hill. It is best,
therefore, that one not try to imitate the powerful, but simply follow their



instructions; nor should one try to occupy their posts without qualification.
There are so many “incarnations” of God without the power of the Supreme

Godhead.

TEXT 25

‘éﬁﬁi: WWWWWI
WWWWWHQRH

saktc‘th karmahy avidvc‘tmso
yathc‘t kurvcmti bhc‘wata

kmyc‘td vidvc‘tms tathc‘tsaktas’
cikirsur loka—sahgraham

SYNONYMS

saktc‘th—being attached; karmahi—in prescribed duties; avidvc‘tmsah—the
ignorant; yathc‘t—as much as; kmvcmti—they do; bhc‘wata—O descendant of
Bharata; kmyc‘tt—must do; vidvc‘m—the learned; tathc‘I—thus;
asaktah—without attachment; cikirsuh—desiring to lead;
loka—sahgraham—the people in general.

TRANSLATION

As the ignorant perform their duties With attachment to results, the learned
may similarly act, but Without attachment, for the sake of leading people on the
right path.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness and a person not in Krsna consciousness
are differentiated by different desires. A Krsna conscious person does not do
anything which is not conducive to development of Krsna consciousness. He
may even act exactly like the ignorant person, who is too much attached to



material activities, but one is engaged in such activities for the satisfaction of
his sense gratification, whereas the other is engaged for the satisfaction of
Krsna. Therefore, the Krsna conscious person is required to show the people
how to act and how to engage the results of action for the purpose of Krsna

consciousness.

TEXT 26
H aﬁiﬁa‘ swim WWI
WW: am" qs N

ha buddhi—bhedam jcmayed

ajﬁc‘mc‘tm karma-sahgim‘tm
josayet sarva-karmc‘mi

vidvc‘m yuktah samacarah

SYNONYMS

ha—not; buddhi—bhedam—disruption of intelligence; jcmayet—he should
cause; ajﬁc‘mc‘tm—of the foolish; karma—sahgmc‘tm—who are attached to fruitive
work; josayet—he should dovetail; sarva—all; karmahi—work; vidvc‘m—a
learned person; yuktah—engaged; samacarah—practicing.

TRANSLATION

So as not to disrupt the minds of ignorant men attached to the fruitive
results of prescribed duties, a learned person should not induce them to stop
work. Rather, by working in the spirit of devotion, he should engage them in all
sorts of activities [for the gradual development of Krsna consciousness].

PURPORT

Vedais’ ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. That is the end of all Vedic rituals. All
rituals, all performances of sacrifices, and everything that is put into the



Vedas, including all direction for material activities, are meant for
understanding Krsna, who is the ultimate goal of life. But because the
conditioned souls do not know anything beyond sense gratification, they study
the Vedas to that end. But through fruitive activities and sense gratification
regulated by the Vedic rituals one is gradually elevated to Krsna consciousness.
Therefore a realized soul in Krsna consciousness should not disturb others in
their activities or understanding, but he should act by showing how the results
of all work can be dedicated to the service of Krsna. The learned Krsna
conscious person may act in such a way that the ignorant person working for
sense gratification may learn how to act and how to behave. Although the
ignorant man is not to be disturbed in his activities, a slightly developed Krsna
conscious person may directly be engaged in the service of the Lord without
waiting for other Vedic formulas. For this fortunate man there is no need to
follow the Vedic rituals, because by direct Krsna consciousness one can have
all the results one would otherwise derive from following one’s prescribed
duties.

TEXT 27

mzmeuﬁmfemu
WWWIIWI

prakrteh kriyamc‘mc‘mi
guhaih karmahi sarvas’ah

ahahkc‘wa—vimﬁdhc‘ttmc‘t

kartc‘tham iti mahyate

SYNONYMS

prakrteh—of material nature; kriyamc‘mc‘mi—being done; guhaih—by the
modes; karmahi—activities; sarvas’ah—all kinds of;
ahahkc‘wa—vimﬁdha—bewildered by false ego; dtmc‘t—the spirit soul;
kartc‘t—doer; aham—I; iti—thus; manyate—he thinks.



TRANSLATION

The spirit soul bewildered by the influence of false ego thinks himself the
doer of activities that are in actuality carried out by the three modes of material
nature.

PURPORT

Two persons, one in Krsna consciousness and the other in material
consciousness, working on the same level, may appear to be working on the
same platform, but there is a wide gulf of difference in their respective
positions. The person in material consciousness is convinced by false ego that
he is the doer of everything. He does not know that the mechanism of the
body is produced by material nature, which works under the supervision of the
Supreme Lord. The materialistic person has no knowledge that ultimately he is
under the control of Krsna. The person in false ego takes all credit for doing
everything independently, and that is the symptom of his nescience. He does
not know that this gross and subtle body is the creation of material nature,
under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as such his bodily
and mental activities should be engaged in the service of Krsna, in Krsna
consciousness. The ignorant man forgets that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is known as Hrsikes’a, or the master of the senses of the material
body, for due to his long misuse of the senses in sense gratification, he is
factually bewildered by the false ego, which makes him forget his eternal
relationship with Krsna.

TEXT 28

WWW”
wnﬁgaﬁeeﬁrmﬁmuwu

tattva—vit tu mahc‘I—bc‘tho
guha—karma—Uibhc‘tgayoh



gunc‘t guhesu vartcmta
iti matvc‘t ha sajjate

SYNONYMS

tattva—vit—the knower of the Absolute Truth; tu—but; mahc‘t—bc‘tho—O
mighty-armed one; guha-kai'ma—of works under material influence;
vibhc‘tgayoh—differences; guhc‘th—senses; guhesu—in sense gratification;
vartcmte—are being engaged; iti—thus; matvc‘I—thinking; ha—never;
sajjate—becomes attached.

TRANSLATION

One Who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, 0 mighty-armed, does not
engage himself in the senses and sense gratification, knowing well the
differences between work in devotion and work for fruitive results.

PURPORT

The knower of the Absolute Truth is convinced of his awkward position in
material association. He knows that he is part and parcel of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and that his position should not be in the
material creation. He knows his real identity as part and parcel of the
Supreme, who is eternal bliss and knowledge, and he realizes that somehow or
other he is entrapped in the material conception of life. In his pure state of
existence he is meant to dovetail his activities in devotional service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. He therefore engages himself in the
activities of Krsna consciousness and becomes naturally unattached to the
activities of the material senses, which are all circumstantial and temporary.
He knows that his material condition of life is under the supreme control of
the Lord; consequently he is not disturbed by all kinds of material reactions,
which he considers to be the mercy of the Lord. According to
Srimad-Bhagavatam, one who knows the Absolute Truth in three different
features—namely Brahman, Paramatma, and the Supreme Personality of



Godhead—is called tattUa-Uit, for he knows also his own factual position in
relationship with the Supreme.

TEXT 29

WWWWI
WWWIIQRH

prakrter guha—sammﬁdhc‘th
sajjcmte guha-karmasu

tc‘m akrtma—vido mandah
krtsna—vih ha vicalayet

SYNONYMS

prakrteh—of material nature; guha—by the modes; sammﬁdhc‘th—befooled by
material identification; sajjcmte—they become engaged; guha-karmasu—in
material activities; tc'm—those; akrtsna-Uidah—persons with a poor fund of
knowledge; mandah—lazy to understand self-realization; krtsna-Uit—one who
is in factual knowledge; ha—not; vicalayet—should try to agitate.

TRANSLATION

Bewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage
themselves in material activities and become attached. But the Wise should not
unsettle them, although these duties are inferior due to the performers’ lack of
knowledge.

PURPORT

Persons who are unknowledgeable falsely identify with gross material
consciousness and are full of material designations. This body is a gift of the
material nature, and one who is too much attached to the bodily consciousness
is called manda, or a lazy person without understanding of spirit soul. Ignorant



men think of the body as the self; they accept bodily connections with others
as kinsmanship, the land in which the body is obtained is their object of
worship, and they consider the formalities of religious rituals to be ends in
themselves. Social work, nationalism and altruism are some of the activities for
such materially designated persons. Under the spell of such designations, they
are always busy in the material field; for them spiritual realization is a myth,
and so they are not interested. Those who are enlightened in spiritual life,
however, should not try to agitate such materially engrossed persons. Better to
prosecute one’s own spiritual activities silently. Such bewildered persons may
be engaged in such primary moral principles of life as nonviolence and similar
materially benevolent work.

Men who are ignorant cannot appreciate activities in Krsna consciousness,
and therefore Lord Krsna advises us not to disturb them and simply waste
valuable time. But the devotees of the Lord are more kind than the Lord
because they understand the purpose of the Lord. Consequently they
undertake all kinds of risks, even to the point of approaching ignorant men to
try to engage them in the acts of Krsna consciousness, which are absolutely
necessary for the human being.

TEXT 30

qﬁaaiﬁtﬁﬁrammmﬁaml
Wwwmzuaou

mayi sarvc‘mi karmahi
sahhyasyc‘tdhyc‘ttma—cetasc‘t
m'rc‘ts’ir m'rmamo thZtvc‘t
yudhyasva vigata—jvarah

SYNONYMS

mayi—unto Me; sarvc‘mi—all sorts of; karmahi—activities; sannyasya—giving
up completely; adhyc'ttma—with full knowledge of the self; cetasc‘t—by



consciousness; hirc'ts’ih—without desire for profit; hirmamah—without
ownership; bhﬁtvc‘t—so being; yudhyasva—fight; vigata—jvarah—without being
lethargic.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, 0 Arjuna, surrendering all your works unto Me, With full
knowledge of Me, Without desires for profit, With no claims to proprietorship,
and free from lethargy, fight.

PURPORT

This verse clearly indicates the purpose of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The Lord
instructs that one has to become fully Krsna conscious to discharge duties, as if
in military discipline. Such an injunction may make things a little difficult;
nevertheless duties must be carried out, with dependence on Krsna, because
that is the constitutional position of the living entity. The living entity cannot
be happy independent of the cooperation of the Supreme Lord, because the
eternal constitutional position of the living entity is to become subordinate to
the desires of the Lord. Arjuna was therefore ordered by Sri Krsna to fight as if
the Lord were his military commander. One has to sacrifice everything for the
good will of the Supreme Lord, and at the same time discharge prescribed
duties without claiming proprietorship. Arjuna did not have to consider the
order of the Lord; he had only to execute His order. The Supreme Lord is the
soul of all souls; therefore, one who depends solely and wholly on the Supreme
Soul without personal consideration, or in other words, one who is fully Krsna
conscious, is called adhyc'ttma-cetas. Nirc‘ts’ih means that one has to act on the
order of the master but should not expect fruitive results. The cashier may
count millions of dollars for his employer, but he does not claim a cent for
himself. Similarly, one has to realize that nothing in the world belongs to any
individual person, but that everything belongs to the Supreme Lord. That is
the real purport of mayi, or “unto Me.” And when one acts in such Krsna
consciousness, certainly he does not claim proprietorship over anything. This
consciousness is called hirmama, or “nothing is mine.” And if there is any



reluctance to execute such a stern order, which is without consideration of
so-called kinsmen in the bodily relationship, that reluctance should be thrown
off; in this way one may become Uigata-jvam, or without feverish mentality or
lethargy. Everyone, according to his quality and position, has a particular type
of work to discharge, and all such duties may be discharged in Krsna
consciousness, as described above. That will lead one to the path of liberation.

TEXT 31

3131438an Imam
Wswﬁﬁaﬁﬁsﬁm || 39 ||

ye me matam idam m'tyam
ahutisthahti mahavc‘th

s’raddhc‘wahto ’hasﬁyahto

mucycmte te ’pi karmabhih

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; me—My; matam—injunctions; idam—these; m'tyam—as an
eternal function; ahutisthcmti—execute regularly; mc‘mavc‘th—human beings;
s’raddhc‘t—vahtah—with faith and devotion; ahasﬁyahtah—without envy;
mucycmte—become free; te—all of them; api—even; karmabhih—from the
bondage of the law of fruitive actions.

TRANSLATION

Those persons Who execute their duties according to My injunctions and
Who follow this teaching faithfully, Without envy, become free from the
bondage of fruitive actions.

PURPORT

The injunction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the



essence of all Vedic wisdom and therefore is eternally true without exception.
As the Vedas are eternal, so this truth of Krsna consciousness is also eternal.
One should have firm faith in this injunction, without envying the Lord.
There are many philosophers who write comments on the Bhagavad-gitc‘t but
have no faith in Krsna. They will never be liberated from the bondage of
fruitive action. But an ordinary man with firm faith in the eternal injunctions
of the Lord, even though unable to execute such orders, becomes liberated
from the bondage of the law of karma. In the beginning of Krsna
consciousness, one may not fully discharge the injunctions of the Lord, but
because one is not resentful of this principle and works sincerely without
consideration of defeat and hopelessness, he will surely be promoted to the
stage of pure Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 32

ﬁﬁaaaagﬁimﬁsﬁﬁml
WWWHIBQH

ye tv etad abhyasﬁyahto
hahutisthahti me matam
sarva—jﬁaha—vimﬁdhams tc‘m
viddhi hastc‘m acetasah

SYNONYMS

ye—those; tu—however; etat—this; abhyasﬁycmtah—out of envy; ha—do not;
ahutisthahti—regularly perform; me—My; matam—injunction;
sarva-jﬁc‘ma—in all sorts of knowledge; vimﬁdhc‘m—perfectly befooled;
tc‘m—they are; viddhi—know it well; hastc‘m—all ruined; acetasah—without
Krsna consciousness.

TRANSLATION
But those Who, out of envy, disregard these teachings and do not follow



them are to be considered bereft of all knowledge, befooled, and ruined in their
endeavors for perfection.

PURPORT

The ﬂaw of not being Krsna conscious is clearly stated herein. As there is
punishment for disobedience to the order of the supreme executive head, so
there is certainly punishment for disobedience to the order of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. A disobedient person, however great he may be, is
ignorant of his own self, and of the Supreme Brahman, Paramatma and the
Personality of Godhead, due to a vacant heart. Therefore there is no hope of
perfection of life for him.

TEXT 33

aqsiéieﬁmzmehaﬁfm
ﬁﬁmﬁawﬁﬁﬁmzﬁaaﬁwﬁruasu

sadrs’am cestate svasydh
prakrter jﬁc‘mavc‘m api

prakrtim yc‘mti thZtc‘mi
higrahah kim karisyati

SYNONYMS

sadrs’am—accordingly; cestate—tries; svasyc‘th—by his own; prakrteh—modes
of nature; jhc‘ma—vc‘m—learned; api—although; prakrtim—nature;
yc‘mti—undergo; bhﬁtc'mi—all living entities; higrahah—repression;
kim—what; karisyati—can do.

TRANSLATION

Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for everyone
follows the nature he has acquired from the three modes. What can repression



accomplish?

PURPORT

Unless one is situated on the transcendental platform of Krsna
consciousness, he cannot get free from the influence of the modes of material
nature, as it is confirmed by the Lord in the Seventh Chapter (7.14).
Therefore, even for the most highly educated person on the mundane plane, it
is impossible to get out of the entanglement of mciyc't simply by theoretical
knowledge, or by separating the soul from the body. There are many so-called
spiritualists who outwardly pose as advanced in the science but inwardly or
privately are completely under particular modes of nature which they are
unable to surpass. Academically, one may be very learned, but because of his
long association with material nature, he is in bondage. Krsna consciousness
helps one to get out of the material entanglement, even though one may be
engaged in his prescribed duties in terms of material existence. Therefore,
without being fully in Krsna consciousness, one should not give up his
occupational duties. No one should suddenly give up his prescribed duties and
become a so-called yogi or transcendentalist artificially. It is better to be
situated in one’s position and to try to attain Krsna consciousness under
superior training. Thus one may be freed from the clutches of Krsna’s mciyc't.

TEXT 34

Wﬁwﬁmﬁuﬁ
WWWWIIwII

ihdriyasyehdriyasyarthe
rc‘tga-dvesau vyavasthitau
tayor ha vas’am cigacchet
tau hy asya paripahthihau

SYNONYMS



ihdriyasya—of the senses; ihdriyasya arthe—in the sense objects;
rc‘tga—attachment; dvesau—also detachment; vyavasthitau—put under
regulations; tayoh—of them; ha—never; vas’am—control; cigacchet—one
should come; tau—those; hi—certainly; asya—his; paripahthihau—stumbling

blocks.

TRANSLATION

There are principles to regulate attachment and aversion pertaining to the
senses and their objects. One should not come under the control of such
attachment and aversion, because they are stumbling blocks on the path of
self-realization.

PURPORT

Those who are in Krsna consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage in
material sense gratification. But those who are not in such consciousness
should follow the rules and regulations of the revealed scriptures. Unrestricted
sense enjoyment is the cause of material encagement, but one who follows the
rules and regulations of the revealed scriptures does not become entangled by
the sense objects. For example, sex enjoyment is a necessity for the
conditioned soul, and sex enjoyment is allowed under the license of marriage
ties. According to scriptural injunctions, one is forbidden to engage in sex
relationships with any women other than ones wife. All other women are to
be considered as one’s mother. But in spite of such injunctions, a man is still
inclined to have sex relationships with other women. These propensities are to
be curbed; otherwise they will be stumbling blocks on the path of
self-realization. As long as the material body is there, the necessities of the
material body are allowed, but under rules and regulations. And yet, we should
not rely upon the control of such allowances. One has to follow those rules and
regulations, unattached to them, because practice of sense gratification under
regulations may also lead one to go astray—as much as there is always the
chance of an accident, even on the royal roads. Although they may be very
carefully maintained, no one can guarantee that there will be no danger even



on the safest road. The sense enjoyment spirit has been current a very long,
long time, owing to material association. Therefore, in spite of regulated sense
enjoyment, there is every chance of falling down; therefore any attachment
for regulated sense enjoyment must also be avoided by all means. But
attachment to Krsna consciousness, or acting always in the loving service of
Krsna, detaches one from all kinds of sensory activities. Therefore, no one
should try to be detached from Krsna consciousness at any stage of life. The
whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of sense attachment is ultimately
to become situated on the platform of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 35

WWWWWI
mﬁﬁméiazwwﬁi IIBKII

s’reyc‘m sva—dharmo viguhah
para-dharmc‘tt sv—ahusthitc‘tt
sva—dharme hidhcmam s’reyah
para—dharmo bhayc‘wahah

SYNONYMS

s’reyc‘m—far better; sva—dharmah—one’s prescribed duties; viguhah—even
faulty; para-dharmc‘tt—than duties mentioned for others;
su—ahusthitc‘tt—perfectly done; sva-dharme—in one’s prescribed duties;
hidhaham—destruction; s’reyah—better; para-dharmah—duties prescribed for
others; bhaya—c‘wahah—dangerous.

TRANSLATION

It is far better to discharge one’s prescribed duties, even though faultily,
than another’s duties perfectly. Destruction in the course of performing one’s
own duty is better than engaging in another’s duties, for to follow another’s
path is dangerous.



PURPORT

One should therefore discharge his prescribed duties in full Krsna
consciousness rather than those prescribed for others. Materially, prescribed
duties are duties enjoined according to one’s psychophysical condition, under
the spell of the modes of material nature. Spiritual duties are as ordered by the
spiritual master for the transcendental service of Krsna. But whether material
or spiritual, one should stick to his prescribed duties even up to death, rather
than imitate another’s prescribed duties. Duties on the spiritual platform and
duties on the material platform may be different, but the principle of following
the authorized direction is always good for the performer. When one is under
the spell of the modes of material nature, one should follow the prescribed
rules for his particular situation and should not imitate others. For example, a
brc‘thmaha, who is in the mode of goodness, is nonviolent, whereas a ksati'iya,
who is in the mode of passion, is allowed to be Violent. As such, for a ksati'iya it
is better to be vanquished following the rules of Violence than to imitate a
brc‘thmaha who follows the principles of nonviolence. Everyone has to cleanse
his heart by a gradual process, not abruptly. However, when one transcends
the modes of material nature and is fully situated in Krsna consciousness, he
can perform anything and everything under the direction of a bona fide
spiritual master. In that complete stage of Krsna consciousness, the ksati'iya
may act as a brdhmaha, or a brc‘thmaha may act as a ksatriya. In the
transcendental stage, the distinctions of the material world do not apply. For
example, Vis’vamitra was originally a ksati'iya, but later on he acted as a
brc‘thmaha, whereas Paras’urama was a brc‘thmaha but later on he acted as a
ksati'iya. Being transcendentally situated, they could do so; but as long as one is
on the material platform, he must perform his duties according to the modes of
material nature. At the same time, he must have a full sense of Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 36



Wain?
aahqqaﬁsdqrdatﬁrwzl
aﬁmﬁaﬁwwﬁaﬁu‘ﬁazuasu

arjuha uvc‘tca
atha keha prayukto ’yam
papam carati pﬁrusah
ahicchahh api vamheya
balc‘td iva m'yojitah

SYNONYMS

arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; atha—then; keha—by what;
prayuktah—impelled; ayam—one; papam—sins; carati—does; pﬁrusah—a
man; cmicchcm—without desiring; api—although; vc‘trsneya—O descendant of
Vrsni; balc‘tt—by force; iva—as if; m'yojitah—engaged.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O descendant of Vrsni, by What is one impelled to sinful acts,
even unwillingly, as if engaged by force?

PURPORT

A living entity, as part and parcel of the Supreme, is originally spiritual,
pure, and free from all material contaminations. Therefore, by nature he is not
subject to the sins of the material world. But when he is in contact with the
material nature, he acts in many sinful ways without hesitation, and sometimes
even against his will. As such, Arjuna’s question to Krsna is very sanguine, as
to the perverted nature of the living entities. Although the living entity
sometimes does not want to act in sin, he is still forced to act. Sinful actions
are not, however, impelled by the Supersoul within, but are due to another
cause, as the Lord explains in the next verse.



TEXT 37

W
WWWWWH
WWWWII eII

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
kama esa krodha esa
rajo-guha-samudbhavah
mahc‘ts’aho mahc‘I—pc‘tpmc‘t
viddhy eham iha vairiham

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Personality of Godhead said; kamah—lust;
esah—this; krodhah—wrath; esah—this; rajah—guha—the mode of passion;
samudbhavah—born of; mahc‘t—as’ahah—all-devouring; mahc‘t—pc‘tpmc‘t—greatly
sinful; Uiddhi—know; enam—this; iha—in the material world;
vairiham—greatest enemy.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: It is lust only, Arjuna, Which is
born of contact With the material mode of passion and later transformed into
wrath, and Which is the all-devouring sinful enemy of this world.

PURPORT

When a living entity comes in contact with the material creation, his
eternal love for Krsna is transformed into lust, in association with the mode of
passion. Or, in other words, the sense of love of God becomes transformed into
lust, as milk in contact with sour tamarind is transformed into yogurt. Then
again, when lust is unsatisfied, it turns into wrath; wrath is transformed into
illusion, and illusion continues the material existence. Therefore, lust is the



greatest enemy of the living entity, and it is lust only which induces the pure
living entity to remain entangled in the material world. Wrath is the
manifestation of the mode of ignorance; these modes exhibit themselves as
wrath and other corollaries. If, therefore, the mode of passion, instead of being
degraded into the mode of ignorance, is elevated to the mode of goodness by
the prescribed method of living and acting, then one can be saved from the
degradation of wrath by spiritual attachment.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead expanded Himself into many for His
ever-increasing spiritual bliss, and the living entities are parts and parcels of
this spiritual bliss. They also have partial independence, but by misuse of their
independence, when the service attitude is transformed into the propensity for
sense enjoyment, they come under the sway of lust. This material creation is
created by the Lord to give facility to the conditioned souls to fulfill these
lustful propensities, and when completely baffled by prolonged lustful
activities, the living entities begin to inquire about their real position.

This inquiry is the beginning of the Vedc'mta-sﬁtms, wherein it is said,
athc'tto brahma jijﬁc'tsc't: one should inquire into the Supreme. And the Supreme
is defined in Srimad-Bhagavatam as jcmmc‘tdy asya yato ’hvayc‘td itaratas’ ca, or,
“The origin of everything is the Supreme Brahman.” Therefore the origin of
lust is also in the Supreme. If, therefore, lust is transformed into love for the
Supreme, or transformed into Krsna consciousness—or, in other words,
desiring everything for Krsna—then both lust and wrath can be spiritualized.
Hanuman, the great servitor of Lord Rama, exhibited his wrath by burning the
golden city of Ravana, but by doing so he became the greatest devotee of the
Lord. Here also, in Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the Lord induces Arjuna to engage his wrath
upon his enemies for the satisfaction of the Lord. Therefore, lust and wrath,
when they are employed in Krsna consciousness, become our friends instead of
our enemies.

TEXT 38

WWWWWHI



Eraﬁﬁmqa‘i War Wu 3= ||

dhﬁmem‘wriyate vahm'r
yathc‘tdars’o maleha ca
yatholbem‘wrto garbhas
tathd tehedam c‘wrtam

SYNONYMS

dhﬁmeha—by smoke; c‘wriyate—is covered; vahm'h—fire; yathc‘I—just as;
adars’ah—mirror; maleha—by dust; ca—also; yathc‘t—just as; ulbeha—by the
womb; c‘wrtah—is covered; garbhah—embryo; tathc‘t—so; teha—by that lust;
idam—this; c‘wrtam—is covered.

TRANSLATION

As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the embryo
is covered by the womb, the living entity is similarly covered by different
degrees of this lust.

PURPORT

There are three degrees of covering of the living entity by which his pure
consciousness is obscured. This covering is but lust under different
manifestations like smoke in the fire, dust on the mirror, and the womb about
the embryo. When lust is compared to smoke, it is understood that the fire of
the living spark can be a little perceived. In other words, when the living
entity exhibits his Krsna consciousness slightly, he may be likened to the fire
covered by smoke. Although fire is necessary where there is smoke, there is no
overt manifestation of fire in the early stage. This stage is like the beginning of
Krsna consciousness. The dust on the mirror refers to a cleansing process of
the mirror of the mind by so many spiritual methods. The best process is to
chant the holy names of the Lord. The embryo covered by the womb is an
analogy illustrating a helpless position, for the child in the womb is so helpless



that he cannot even move. This stage of living condition can be compared to
that of the trees. The trees are also living entities, but they have been put in
such a condition of life by such a great exhibition of lust that they are almost
void of all consciousness. The covered mirror is compared to the birds and
beasts, and the smoke-covered fire is compared to the human being. In the
form of a human being, the living entity may revive a little Krsna
consciousness, and, if he makes further development, the fire of spiritual life
can be kindled in the human form of life. By careful handling of the smoke in
the fire, fire can be made to blaze. Therefore the human form of life is a
chance for the living entity to escape the entanglement of material existence.
In the human form of life, one can conquer the enemy, lust, by cultivation of
Krsna consciousness under able guidance.

TEXT 39

WWWWI
Wﬁﬁagmﬁmaussu

avrtam jﬁc‘mam eteha
jﬁc‘miho hitya—vairihc‘t
kama—rﬁpeha kauhteya

duspmehc‘maleha ca

SYNONYMS

avrtam—covered; jhc‘mam—pure consciousness; eteha—by this; jﬁc‘mihah—of
the knower; hitya—vairihc‘t—by the eternal enemy; kama—rﬁpeha—in the form
of lust; kauhteya—O son of Kunti; duspmeha—never to be satisfied;
ahaleha—by the fire; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

Thus the Wise living entity’s pure consciousness becomes covered by his
eternal enemy in the form of lust, Which is never satisfied and Which burns like



fire.

PURPORT

It is said in the Mahu-smi‘ti that lust cannot be satisfied by any amount of
sense enjoyment, just as fire is never extinguished by a constant supply of fuel.
In the material world, the center of all activities is sex, and thus this material
world is called maithunya-c‘tgc‘tm, or the shackles of sex life. In the ordinary
prison house, criminals are kept within bars; similarly, the criminals who are
disobedient to the laws of the Lord are shackled by sex life. Advancement of
material civilization on the basis of sense gratification means increasing the
duration of the material existence of a living entity. Therefore, this lust is the
symbol of ignorance by which the living entity is kept within the material
world. While one enjoys sense gratification, it may be that there is some
feeling of happiness, but actually that so-called feeling of happiness is the
ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer.

TEXT 40

WﬁWI
Wmmueou

ihdriyc‘mi memo buddhir

asyc‘tdhisthc‘mam ucyate
etair vimohayaty esa

jﬁc‘mam c‘wrtya dehiham

SYNONYMS

ihdriyc‘mi—the senses; mahah—the mind; buddhih—the intelligence; asya—of
this lust; adhisthc‘mam—sitting place; ucyate—is called; etaih—by all these;
vimohayati—bewilders; esah—this lust; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
c‘wrtya—covering; dehiham—of the embodied.



TRANSLATION

The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of this lust.
Through them lust covers the real knowledge of the living entity and bewilders
him.

PURPORT

The enemy has captured different strategic positions in the body of the
conditioned soul, and therefore Lord Krsna is giving hints of those places, so
that one who wants to conquer the enemy may know where he can be found.
Mind is the center of all the activities of the senses, and thus when we hear
about sense objects the mind generally becomes a reservoir of all ideas of sense
gratification; and, as a result, the mind and the senses become the repositories
of lust. Next, the intelligence department becomes the capital of such lustful
propensities. Intelligence is the immediate neXt-door neighbor of the spirit
soul. Lusty intelligence influences the spirit soul to acquire the false ego and
identify itself with matter, and thus with the mind and senses. The spirit soul
becomes addicted to enjoying the material senses and mistakes this as true
happiness. This false identification of the spirit soul is very nicely explained in

the grimad-Bbégavatam (10.84.13):

yasyc‘ttma—buddhih kuhape tri—dhc‘ttuke

sva—dhih kalatrc‘tdisu bhauma ijya—dhih
yat—tirtha—buddhih salile ha karhicij
jahesv abhijﬁesu sa eva go—kharah

“A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his
self, who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who
considers the land of birth worshipable, and who goes to the place of
pilgrimage simply to take a bath rather than meet men of transcendental
knowledge there, is to be considered like an ass or a cow.

TEXT 41



WWWWI
wméﬁaﬁﬁamﬁmueau

tasmdt tvam ihdriyc‘my adau
hiyamya bharatarsabha

papmc‘mam prajahi hy eham
jﬁc‘ma—vijﬁc‘ma—mis’aham

SYNONYMS

tasmc‘It—therefore; tvam—you; ihdriyc‘mi—senses; adau—in the beginning;
hiyamya—by regulating; bhamta—Tsabha—O chief amongst the descendants of
Bharata; papmc'mam—the great symbol of sin; prajahi—curb; hi—certainly;
enam—this; jﬁc‘ma—of knowledge; Uijﬁc'ma—and scientific knowledge of the
pure soul; hasaham—the destroyer.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, 0 Arjuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning curb this
great symbol of sin [lust] by regulating the senses, and slay this destroyer of
knowledge and self-realization.

PURPORT

The Lord advised Arjuna to regulate the senses from the very beginning so
that he could curb the greatest sinful enemy, lust, which destroys the urge for
self-realization and specific knowledge of the self. Jﬁaha refers to knowledge of
self as distinguished from non-self, or in other words, knowledge that the spirit
soul is not the body. Vijﬁc'ma refers to specific knowledge of the spirit soul’s
constitutional position and his relationship to the Supreme Soul. It is
explained thus in the grimad-Bbégavatam (2.9.31):

jﬁc‘mam parama—guhyam me
yad vijﬁc‘ma—samahvitam



sa-rahasyam tad-ahgam ca
grhc‘ma gaditam mayc‘t

“The knowledge of the self and Supreme Self is very confidential and
mysterious, but such knowledge and specific realization can be understood if
explained with their various aspects by the Lord Himself.” Bhagavad-gitc‘t gives
us that general and specific knowledge of the self. The living entities are parts
and parcels of the Lord, and therefore they are simply meant to serve the Lord.
This consciousness is called Krsna consciousness. So, from the very beginning
of life one has to learn this Krsna consciousness, and thereby one may become
fully Krsna conscious and act accordingly.

Lust is only the perverted reﬂection of the love of God which is natural for
every living entity. But if one is educated in Krsna consciousness from the very
beginning, that natural love of God cannot deteriorate into lust. When love of
God deteriorates into lust, it is very difficult to return to the normal condition.
Nonetheless, Krsna consciousness is so powerful that even a late beginner can
become a lover of God by following the regulative principles of devotional
service. So, from any stage of life, or from the time of understanding its
urgency, one can begin regulating the senses in Krsna consciousness,
devotional service of the Lord, and turn the lust into love of Godhead—the
highest perfectional stage of human life.

TEXT 42

W MW: at 1H: I
WWWﬂﬁ ma: ll 8:? II
ihdriyc‘mi parahy c‘Ihm
ihdriyebhyah param mahah

mahasas tu para buddhir
yo buddheh paratas tu sah

SYNONYMS



ihdriyc‘mi—senses; parahi—superior; c‘Ihuh—are said; ihdriyebhyah—more than
the senses; param—superior; mahah—the mind; mahasah—more than the
mind; tu—also; paTa—superior; buddhih—intelligence; yah—who;
buddheh—more than the intelligence; paratah—superior; tu—but; sah—he.

TRANSLATION

The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the
senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul] is even
higher than the intelligence.

PURPORT

The senses are different outlets for the activities of lust. Lust is reserved
within the body, but it is given vent through the senses. Therefore, the senses
are superior to the body as a whole. These outlets are not in use when there is
superior consciousness, or Krsna consciousness. In Krsna consciousness the
soul makes direct connection with the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
therefore the hierarchy of bodily functions, as described here, ultimately ends
in the Supreme Soul. Bodily action means the functions of the senses, and
stopping the senses means stopping all bodily actions. But since the mind is
active, then even though the body may be silent and at rest, the mind will
act—as it does during dreaming. But above the mind is the determination of
the intelligence, and above the intelligence is the soul proper. If, therefore, the
soul is directly engaged with the Supreme, naturally all other subordinates,
namely, the intelligence, mind and senses, will be automatically engaged. In
the Katha Upcmisad there is a similar passage, in which it is said that the
objects of sense gratification are superior to the senses, and mind is superior to
the sense objects. If, therefore, the mind is directly engaged in the service of
the Lord constantly, then there is no chance that the senses will become
engaged in other ways. This mental attitude has already been explained. pamm
drstvc‘t hivartate. If the mind is engaged in the transcendental service of the
Lord, there is no chance of its being engaged in the lower propensities. In the
Katha Upcmisad the soul has been described as mahc‘m, the great. Therefore the



soul is above all—namely, the sense objects, the senses, the mind and the
intelligence. Therefore, directly understanding the constitutional position of
the soul is the solution of the whole problem.

With intelligence one has to seek out the constitutional position of the soul
and then engage the mind always in Krsna consciousness. That solves the
whole problem. A neophyte Spiritualist is generally advised to keep aloof from
the objects of the senses. But aside from that, one has to strengthen the mind
by use of intelligence. If by intelligence one engages one’s mind in Krsna
consciousness, by complete surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, then, automatically, the mind becomes stronger, and even though
the senses are very strong, like serpents, they will be no more effective than
serpents with broken fangs. But even though the soul is the master of
intelligence and mind, and the senses also, still, unless it is strengthened by
association with Krsna in Krsna consciousness, there is every chance of falling
down due to the agitated mind.

TEXT 43
Edgazqiwmmmm' I
ﬁﬁmwmu 83 ||

evam buddheh param buddhvc‘t
samstabhyc‘ttmc‘mam citmcmc‘t
jahi s’atrum mahc‘I—bc‘tho
kama—rﬁpam dmdsadam

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; buddheh—to intelligence; param—superior; buddhvc‘t—knowing;
samstabhya—by steadying; citmc‘mam—the mind; citmcmc‘t—by deliberate
intelligence; jahi—conquer; s’atmm—the enemy; mahc‘t—bc‘tho—O
mighty-armed one; kama—rﬁpam—in the form of lust; durasadam—formidable.



TRANSLATION

Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to the material senses, mind and
intelligence, 0 mighty-armed Arjuna, one should steady the mind by deliberate
spiritual intelligence [Krsna consciousness] and thus—by spiritual
strength—conquer this insatiable enemy known as lust.

PURPORT

This Third Chapter of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t is conclusively directive to Krsna
consciousness by knowing oneself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, without considering impersonal voidness the ultimate
end. In the material existence of life, one is certainly influenced by
propensities for lust and desire for dominating the resources of material
nature. Desire for overlording and for sense gratification is the greatest enemy
of the conditioned soul; but by the strength of Krsna consciousness, one can
control the material senses, the mind and the intelligence. One may not give
up work and prescribed duties all of a sudden; but by gradually developing
Krsna consciousness, one can be situated in a transcendental position without
being influenced by the material senses and the mind—by steady intelligence
directed toward one’s pure identity. This is the sum total of this chapter. In the
immature stage of material existence, philosophical speculations and artificial
attempts to control the senses by the so-called practice of yogic postures can
never help a man toward spiritual life. He must be trained in Krsna
consciousness by higher intelligence.

Thus end the Bhaktivedahta Purports to the Third Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Karma—yoga, or the Discharge of One’s Prescribed
Duty in Krsna Consciousness.



 

Transcendental Knowledge

TEXT 1

. ah'lia'ia'a
sq ﬂame 21131 WI
W 9175' ﬁﬁwsaaﬁau 9 ||

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
imam vivasvate yogam
proktavc‘m aham avyayam
vivasvc‘m mahave prc‘tha
mahur iksvdkave ’bravit

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; imam—this;
vivasvate—unto the sun-god; yogam—the science of one’s relationship to the
Supreme; proktavc‘m—instructed; aham—I; avyayam—imperishable;
vivasvc‘m—Vivasvan (the sun-god’s name); mahave—unto the father of
mankind (of the name Vaivasvata); prc‘tha—told; mahuh—the father of
mankind; iksvc‘tkave—unto King Iksvaku; abravit—said.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead, Lord 81:1 Krsna, said: I instructed this
imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed
it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Iksvaku.



PURPORT

Herein we find the history of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t traced from a remote time
when it was delivered to the royal order of all planets, beginning from the sun
planet. The kings of all planets are especially meant for the protection of the
inhabitants, and therefore the royal order should understand the science of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t in order to be able to rule the citizens and protect them from
material bondage to lust. Human life is meant for cultivation of spiritual
knowledge, in eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and the executive heads of all states and all planets are obliged to impart this
lesson to the citizens by education, culture and devotion. In other words, the
executive heads of all states are intended to spread the science of Krsna
consciousness so that the people may take advantage of this great science and
pursue a successful path, utilizing the opportunity of the human form of life.

In this millennium, the sun-god is known as Vivasvan, the king of the sun,
which is the origin of all planets within the solar system. In the
Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.52) it is stated:

yac—caksm esa savitc‘t sakala—grahc‘mc‘tm
rc‘tjci samasta-sma—mmtir as’esa—tejc‘th
yasyc‘tjﬁayci bhramati sambhrta—kc‘tla—cakro
govindam adi—pmusam tam aham bhajdmi

“Let me worship,” Lord Brahma said, “the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Govinda [Krsna], who is the original person and under whose order the sun,
which is the king of all planets, is assuming immense power and heat. The sun
represents the eye of the Lord and traverses its orbit in obedience to His
order.”

The sun is the king of the planets, and the sun-god (at present of the name
Vivasvan) rules the sun planet, which is controlling all other planets by
supplying heat and light. He is rotating under the order of Krsna, and Lord
Krsna originally made Vivasvan His first disciple to understand the science of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The Gitc't is not, therefore, a speculative treatise for the
insignificant mundane scholar but is a standard book of knowledge coming



down from time immemorial.
In the Mahabharata (génti-parva 348.51—52) we can trace out the history of
the Gitc't as follows:

tretc‘I-yugc‘tdau ca tato
vivasvc‘m mahave dadau
manus’ ca loka—bhrty—artham
sutciyeksvc‘tkave dadau

iksvc‘tkuhc‘t ca kathito
vyc‘tpya lokc‘m avasthitah

“In the beginning of the millennium known as Treta-yuga this science of
the relationship with the Supreme was delivered by Vivasvan to Manu. Manu,
being the father of mankind, gave it to his son Maharaja Iksvaku, the king of
this earth planet and forefather of the Raghu dynasty, in which Lord
Ramacandra appeared.” Therefore, Bhagavad-gitc‘t existed in human society
from the time of Maharaja Iksvaku.

At the present moment we have just passed through five thousand years of
the Kali-yuga, which lasts 432,000 years. Before this there was Dvapara-yuga
(800,000 years), and before that there was Treta-yuga (1,200,000 years). Thus,
some 2,005,000 years ago, Manu spoke the Bhagavad-gitc‘t to his disciple and son
Maharaja Iksvaku, the king of this planet earth. The age of the current Manu
is calculated to last some 305,300,000 years, of which 120,400,000 have passed.
Accepting that before the birth of Manu the Gitc't was spoken by the Lord to
His disciple the sun-god Vivasvan, a rough estimate is that the Gitc't was spoken
at least 120,400,000 years ago; and in human society it has been extant for two
million years. It was respoken by the Lord again to Arjuna about five thousand
years ago. That is the rough estimate of the history of the Gita, according to
the Gitc't itself and according to the version of the speaker, Lord Sri Krsna. It
was spoken to the sun-god Vivasvan because he is also a ksati'iya and is the
father of all ksatriyas who are descendants of the sun-god, or the sﬁrya-vams’a
ksatriyas. Because Bhagavad-gitc‘t is as good as the Vedas, being spoken by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, this knowledge is apaumseya, superhuman.
Since the Vedic instructions are accepted as they are, without human



interpretation, the Gitc't must therefore be accepted without mundane
interpretation. The mundane wranglers may speculate on the Gitc't in their
own ways, but that is not Bhagavad-gitc‘t as it is. Therefore, Bhagavad-gitc‘t has to
be accepted as it is, from the disciplic succession, and it is described herein
that the Lord spoke to the sun-god, the sun-god spoke to his son Mann and
Mann spoke to his son Iksvaku.

TEXT 2
ﬁwmaﬁﬁmﬁa‘rﬁgn
HWWWW:WIIQII

evam paramparc‘t—prc‘tptam
imam rc‘tjarsayo viduh
sa kaleheha mahatc‘t
yogo nastah parantapa

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; paramparc‘t—by disciplic succession; prc‘tptam—received;
imam—this science; rc‘tja—Tsayah—the saintly kings; Uiduh—understood;
sah—that knowledge; kaleha—in the course of time; iha—in this world;
mahatc't—great; yogah—the science of one’s relationship with the Supreme;
hastah—scattered; parahtapa—O Arjuna, subduer of the enemies.

TRANSLATION

This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course of
time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is appears to be
lost.

PURPORT



It is clearly stated that the Gitc't was especially meant for the saintly kings
because they were to execute its purpose in ruling over the citizens. Certainly
Bhagavad-gitc‘t was never meant for the demonic persons, who would dissipate
its value for no one’s benefit and would devise all types of interpretations
according to personal whims. As soon as the original purpose was scattered by
the motives of the unscrupulous commentators, there arose the need to
reestablish the disciplic succession. Five thousand years ago it was detected by
the Lord Himself that the disciplic succession was broken, and therefore He
declared that the purpose of the Gitc't appeared to be lost. In the same way, at
the present moment also there are so many editions of the Gitc't (especially in
English), but almost all of them are not according to authorized disciplic
succession. There are innumerable interpretations rendered by different
mundane scholars, but almost all of them do not accept the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, although they make a good business on the
words of Sri Krsna. This spirit is demonic, because demons do not believe in
God but simply enjoy the property of the Supreme. Since there is a great need
of an edition of the Gitc't in English, as it is received by the paramparc't
(disciplic succession) system, an attempt is made herewith to fulfill this great
want. Bhagavad-gitc‘t—accepted as it is—is a great boon to humanity; but if it is
accepted as a treatise of philosophical speculations, it is simply a waste of time.

TEXT 3

Hmwﬁsaﬁiﬁizqhﬁzgtmzl
aﬁsaﬁmﬁﬁrwmuau

sa evc‘tyam mayc‘t te ’dya
yogah proktah purc‘ttcmah
bhakto ’si me sakhc‘t ceti
rahasyam hy etad uttamam

SYNONYMS



sah—the same; eva—certainly; ayam—this; maya—by Me; te—unto you;
adya—today; yogah—the science of yoga; proktah—spoken; purc‘ttcmah—very
old; bhaktah—devotee; asi—you are; me—My; sakhc‘t—friend; ca—also;
iti—therefore; rahasyam—mystery; hi—certainly; etat—this;
uttamam—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

That very ancient science of the relationship With the Supreme is today told
by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend and can
therefore understand the transcendental mystery of this science.

PURPORT

There are two classes of men, namely the devotee and the demon. The Lord
selected Arjuna as the recipient of this great science owing to his being a
devotee of the Lord, but for the demon it is not possible to understand this
great mysterious science. There are a number of editions of this great book of
knowledge. Some of them have commentaries by the devotees, and some of
them have commentaries by the demons. Commentation by the devotees is
real, whereas that of the demons is useless. Arjuna accepts Sri Krsna as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and any commentary on the Gitc't following
in the footsteps of Arjuna is real devotional service to the cause of this great
science. The demonic, however, do not accept Lord Krsna as He is. Instead
they concoct something about Krsna and mislead general readers from the
path of Krsna’s instructions. Here is a warning about such misleading paths.
One should try to follow the disciplic succession from Arjuna, and thus be
benefitted by this great science of Srimad Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

TEXT 4

31313331?
Wnaa‘raﬁiqiamﬁaaan



emmmﬁﬁueu

arjuha uvc‘tca
aparam bhavato jcmma
param jcmma vivasvatah
katham etad vijc‘miyc‘tm
tvam adau proktavc‘m iti

SYNONYMS

arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; aparam—junior; bhavatah—Your; jahma—birth;
param—superior; jahma—birth; vivasvatah—of the sun-god; katham—how;
etat—this; Uijcihiyc‘tm—shall I understand; tvam—You; adau—in the
beginning; proktavc‘m—instructed; iti—thus.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvan is senior by birth to You. How am I to
understand that in the beginning You instructed this science to him?

PURPORT

Arjuna is an accepted devotee of the Lord, so how could he not believe
Krsna’s words? The fact is that Arjuna is not inquiring for himself but for
those who do not believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead or for the
demons who do not like the idea that Krsna should be accepted as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; for them only Arjuna inquires on this point, as if he
were himself not aware of the Personality of Godhead, or Krsna. As it will be
evident from the Tenth Chapter, Arjuna knew perfectly well that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the fountainhead of everything and the last
word in transcendence. Of course, Krsna also appeared as the son of Devaki on
this earth. How Krsna remained the same Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the eternal original person, is very difficult for an ordinary man to understand.
Therefore, to clarify this point, Arjuna put this question before Krsna so that



He Himself could speak authoritatively. That Krsna is the supreme authority is
accepted by the whole world, not only at present but from time immemorial,
and the demons alone reject Him. Anyway, since Krsna is the authority
accepted by all, Arjuna put this question before Him in order that Krsna would
describe Himself without being depicted by the demons, who always try to
distort Him in a way understandable to the demons and their followers. It is
necessary that everyone, for his own interest, know the science of Krsna.
Therefore, when Krsna Himself speaks about Himself, it is auspicious for all
the worlds. To the demons, such explanations by Krsna Himself may appear to
be strange because the demons always study Krsna from their own standpoint,
but those who are devotees heartily welcome the statements of Krsna when
they are spoken by Krsna Himself. The devotees will always worship such
authoritative statements of Krsna because they are always eager to know more
and more about Him. The atheists, who consider Krsna an ordinary man, may
in this way come to know that Krsna is superhuman, that He is
sac—cid—c‘mahda-Uigmha [Bs. 5.1]—the eternal form of bliss and
knowledge—that He is transcendental, and that He is above the domination
of the modes of material nature and above the inﬂuence of time and space. A
devotee of Krsna, like Arjuna, is undoubtedly above any misunderstanding of
the transcendental position of Krsna. Arjuna’s putting this question before the
Lord is simply an attempt by the devotee to defy the atheistic attitude of
persons who consider Krsna to be an ordinary human being, subject to the
modes of material nature.

TEXT 5

W
aaﬁﬁaa‘iarﬁwﬁaaaﬁhl
ameaaaaiﬁrﬁaiaexwuau

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
bahﬁm' me vyatitc‘mi
jahmc‘mi tava cc‘trjuha



tc‘my aham veda sarvc‘mi
ha tvam vettha parantapa

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Personality of Godhead said; bahﬁhi—many; me—of
Mine; vyatitc‘mi—have passed; jahmc‘mi—births; tava—of yours; ca—and also;
arjuha—O Arjuna; tc‘mi—those; aham—I; veda—do know; sarvc‘mi—all;
ha—not; tvam—you; vettha—know; parahtapa—O subduer of the enemy.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead said: Many, many births both you and I have
passed. I can remember all of them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!

PURPORT

In the Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.33) we have information of many, many
incarnations of the Lord. It is stated there:

advaitam acyutam ahadim ahahta—rﬁpam
cidyam purc‘ma—pmusam hava—yauvaham ca
vedesu durlabham adurlabham citma-bhaktau

govindam adi—pmusam tam aham bhajdmi

“I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
the original person—absolute, infallible, without beginning. Although
expanded into unlimited forms, He is still the same original, the oldest, and the
person always appearing as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful, all-knowing
forms of the Lord are usually understood by the best Vedic scholars, but they
are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees.”

It is also stated in Brabma-san'ibité (5.39):

rc‘tmc‘tdi—mmtisu kala-hiyameha tisthcm
hahavatc‘tram akarod bhuvcmesu kihtu
krsnah svayam samabhavat paramah pumc‘m yo



govindam adi—pmusam tam aham bhajdmi

“I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
always situated in various incarnations such as Rama, Nrsimha and many
subincarnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godhead known
as Krsna, and who incarnates personally also.”

In the Vedas also it is said that the Lord, although one without a second,
manifests Himself in innumerable forms. He is like the vaidm'ya stone, which
changes color yet still remains one. All those multiforms are understood by the
pure, unalloyed devotees, but not by a simple study of the Vedas (vedesu
durlabham adurlabham citma—bhaktau). Devotees like Arjuna are constant
companions of the Lord, and whenever the Lord incarnates, the associate
devotees also incarnate in order to serve the Lord in different capacities.
Arjuna is one of these devotees, and in this verse it is understood that some
millions of years ago when Lord Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gitc‘t to the sun-god
Vivasvan, Arjuna, in a different capacity, was also present. But the difference
between the Lord and Arjuna is that the Lord remembered the incident
whereas Arjuna could not remember. That is the difference between the
part-and-parcel living entity and the Supreme Lord. Although Arjuna is
addressed herein as the mighty hero who could subdue the enemies, he is
unable to recall what had happened in his various past births. Therefore, a
living entity, however great he may be in the material estimation, can never
equal the Supreme Lord. Anyone who is a constant companion of the Lord is
certainly a liberated person, but he cannot be equal to the Lord. The Lord is
described in the Brahma—samhitd as infallible (acyuta), which means that He
never forgets Himself, even though He is in material contact. Therefore, the
Lord and the living entity can never be equal in all respects, even if the living
entity is as liberated as Arjuna. Although Arjuna is a devotee of the Lord, he
sometimes forgets the nature of the Lord, but by the divine grace a devotee can
at once understand the infallible condition of the Lord, whereas a nondevotee
or a demon cannot understand this transcendental nature. Consequently these
descriptions in the Gitc't cannot be understood by demonic brains. Krsna
remembered acts which were performed by Him millions of years before, but
Arjuna could not, despite the fact that both Krsna and Arjuna are eternal in



nature. We may also note herein that a living entity forgets everything due to
his change of body, but the Lord remembers because He does not change His
sac-cid—c‘mahda body. He is advaita, which means there is no distinction
between His body and Himself. Everything in relation to Him is
spirit—whereas the conditioned soul is different from his material body. And
because the Lord’s body and self are identical, His position is always different
from that of the ordinary living entity, even when He descends to the material
platform. The demons cannot adjust themselves to this transcendental nature
of the Lord, which the Lord Himself explains in the following verse.

TEXT 6

WSﬁWWQﬁSﬁmI
WWW" a II

ajo ’pi scmh avyayc‘ttmc‘t

bhﬁtahc‘tm is’varo ’pi scm
prakrtim svc‘tm adhisthc‘tya
sambhavc‘tmy citma—mc‘tyayc‘t

SYNONYMS

ajah—unborn; api—although; scm—being so; avyaya—without deterioration;
citmc't—body; bhﬁtc'mc'tm—of all those who are born; is’varah—the Supreme
Lord; api—although; scm—being so; prakrtim—in the transcendental form;
svc‘tm—of Myself; adhisthc‘tya—being so situated; sambhavc‘tmi—I do incarnate;
citma-mc‘tyayc‘t—by My internal energy.

TRANSLATION

Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all living entities, I still appear in every millennium
in My original transcendental form.



PURPORT

The Lord has spoken about the peculiarity of His birth: although He may
appear like an ordinary person, He remembers everything of His many, many
past “births,” whereas a common man cannot remember what he has done
even a few hours before. If someone is asked what he did exactly at the same
time one day earlier, it would be very difficult for a common man to answer
immediately. He would surely have to dredge his memory to recall what he was
doing exactly at the same time one day before. And yet, men often dare claim
to be God, or Krsna. One should not be misled by such meaningless claims.
Then again, the Lord explains His prakrti, or His form. Pmkrti means “nature,”
as well as svcmlpa, or “one’s own form.” The Lord says that He appears in His
own body. He does not change His body, as the common living entity changes
from one body to another. The conditioned soul may have one kind of body in
the present birth, but he has a different body in the next birth. In the material
world, the living entity has no fixed body but transmigrates from one body to
another. The Lord, however, does not do so. Whenever He appears, He does so
in the same original body, by His internal potency. In other words, Krsna
appears in this material world in His original eternal form, with two hands,
holding a ﬂute. He appears exactly in His eternal body, uncontaminated by
this material world. Although He appears in the same transcendental body and
is Lord of the universe, it still appears that He takes His birth like an ordinary
living entity. And although His body does not deteriorate like a material body,
it still appears that Lord Krsna grows from childhood to boyhood and from
boyhood to youth. But astonishingly enough He never ages beyond youth. At
the time of the Battle of Kuruksetra, He had many grandchildren at home; or,
in other words, He had sufficiently aged by material calculations. Still He
looked just like a young man twenty or twenty-five years old. We never see a
picture of Krsna in old age because He never grows old like us, although He is
the oldest person in the whole creation—past, present, and future. Neither His
body nor His intelligence ever deteriorates or changes. Therefore, it is clear
that in spite of His being in the material world, He is the same unborn, eternal
form of bliss and knowledge, changeless in His transcendental body and



intelligence. Factually, His appearance and disappearance is like the sun’s
rising, moving before us, and then disappearing from our eyesight. When the
sun is out of sight, we think that the sun is set, and when the sun is before our
eyes, we think that the sun is on the horizon. Actually, the sun is always in its
fixed position, but owing to our defective, insufficient senses, we calculate the
appearance and disappearance of the sun in the sky. And because Lord Krsna’s
appearance and disappearance are completely different from that of any
ordinary, common living entity, it is evident that He is eternal, blissful
knowledge by His internal potency—and He is never contaminated by
material nature. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is unborn yet He still appears to take His birth in
multimanifestations. The Vedic supplementary literatures also confirm that
even though the Lord appears to be taking His birth, He is still without change
of body. In the th‘tgavatam, He appears before His mother as Narayana, with
four hands and the decorations of the six kinds of full opulences. His
appearance in His original eternal form is His causeless mercy, bestowed upon
the living entities so that they can concentrate on the Supreme Lord as He is,
and not on mental concoctions or imaginations, which the impersonalist
wrongly thinks the Lord’s forms to be. The word mciyc't, or citma-mc'tyc‘t, refers to
the Lord’s causeless mercy, according to the Vis’va-kos’a dictionary. The Lord is
conscious of all of His previous appearances and disappearances, but a common
living entity forgets everything about his past body as soon as he gets another
body. He is the Lord of all living entities because He performs wonderful and
superhuman activities while He is on this earth. Therefore, the Lord is always
the same Absolute Truth and is without differentiation between His form and
self, or between His quality and body. A question may now be raised as to why
the Lord appears and disappears in this world. This is explained in the next
verse.

TEXT 7

wwﬁuﬁamﬁiaﬁrmI



WWWIWII

yada yadci hi dharmasya
glc‘mir bhavati bhc‘wata
abhyutthc‘mam adharmasya
tada‘ttmc‘mam srjc‘tmy aham

SYNONYMS

yadc't yada—whenever and wherever; hi—certainly; dharmasya—of religion;
glc‘mih—discrepancies; bhavati—become manifested; bhamta—O descendant
of Bharata; abhyutthc‘mam—predominance; adharmasya—of irreligion;
tadc‘t—at that time; citmc‘mam—self; srjc‘tmi—manifest; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

Whenever and Wherever there is a decline in religious practice, 0
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that time I

descend Myself.

PURPORT

The word srjc'tmi is significant herein. Srjc'tmi cannot be used in the sense of
creation, because, according to the previous verse, there is no creation of the
Lord’s form or body, since all of the forms are eternally existent. Therefore,
srjc'tmi means that the Lord manifests Himself as He is. Although the Lord
appears on schedule, namely at the end of the Dvapara-yuga of the
twenty-eighth millennium of the seventh Manu in one day of Brahma, He has
no obligation to adhere to such rules and regulations, because He is completely
free to act in many ways at His will. He therefore appears by His own will
whenever there is a predominance of irreligiosity and a disappearance of true
religion. Principles of religion are laid down in the Vedas, and any discrepancy
in the matter of properly executing the rules of the Vedas makes one
irreligious. In the Bhagavatam it is stated that such principles are the laws of



the Lord. Only the Lord can manufacture a system of religion. The Vedas are
also accepted as originally spoken by the Lord Himself to Brahma, from within
his heart. Therefore, the principles of dharma, or religion, are the direct orders
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (dharmam tu saksc‘td bhagavat—prahitam
[SB 6319]). These principles are clearly indicated throughout the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The purpose of the Vedas is to establish such principles under
the order of the Supreme Lord, and the Lord directly orders, at the end of the
Gita, that the highest principle of religion is to surrender unto Him only, and
nothing more. The Vedic principles push one towards complete surrender unto
Him; and whenever such principles are disturbed by the demoniac, the Lord
appears. From the Bhagavatam we understand that Lord Buddha is the
incarnation of Krsna who appeared when materialism was rampant and
materialists were using the pretext of the authority of the Vedas. Although
there are certain restrictive rules and regulations regarding animal sacrifice for
particular purposes in the Vedas, people of demonic tendency still took to
animal sacrifice without reference to the Vedic principles. Lord Buddha
appeared to stop this nonsense and to establish the Vedic principles of
nonviolence. Therefore each and every avatc'n'a, or incarnation of the Lord,
has a particular mission, and they are all described in the revealed scriptures.
No one should be accepted as an avatc'n'a unless he is referred to by scriptures.
It is not a fact that the Lord appears only on Indian soil. He can manifest
Himself anywhere and everywhere, and whenever He desires to appear. In
each and every incarnation, He speaks as much about religion as can be
understood by the particular people under their particular circumstances. But
the mission is the same—to lead people to God consciousness and obedience to
the principles of religion. Sometimes He descends personally, and sometimes
He sends His bona fide representative in the form of His son, or servant, or
Himself in some disguised form.

The principles of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t were spoken to Arjuna, and, for that
matter, to other highly elevated persons, because he was highly advanced
compared to ordinary persons in other parts of the world. Two plus two equals
four is a mathematical principle that is true in the beginner’s arithmetic class
and in the advanced class as well. Still, there are higher and lower



mathematics. In all incarnations of the Lord, therefore, the same principles are
taught, but they appear to be higher and lower in varied circumstances. The
higher principles of religion begin with the acceptance of the four orders and
the four statuses of social life, as will be explained later. The whole purpose of
the mission of incarnations is to arouse Krsna consciousness everywhere. Such
consciousness is manifest and nonmanifest only under different circumstances.

TEXT 8

WWWHWI
Wuhanwﬁaﬂiaﬂiuw

paritrc‘mc‘tya sadhandm

Uihas’c‘tya ca duskrtc‘tm
dharma—samsthc‘tpahc‘wthc‘tya

sambhavc‘tmi yuge yuge

SYNONYMS

paritrc‘mc‘tya—for the deliverance; sddhﬁm‘tm—of the devotees; vihas’c‘tya—for
the annihilation; ca—and; duskrtam—of the miscreants; dharma—principles
of religion; samsthapaha—arthdya—to reestablish; sambhavc‘tmi—I do appear;
yuge—millennium; yuge—after millennium.

TRANSLATION

To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to
reestablish the principles of religion, I Myself appear, millennium after
millennium.

PURPORT

According to Bhagavad-gitc‘t, a $61th (holy man) is a man in Krsna
consciousness. A person may appear to be irreligious, but if he has the



qualifications of Krsna consciousness wholly and fully, he is to be understood
to be a scidhu. And duskrtam applies to those who do not care for Krsna
consciousness. Such miscreants, or duskrtam, are described as foolish and the
lowest of mankind, even though they may be decorated with mundane
education, whereas a person who is one hundred percent engaged in Krsna
consciousness is accepted as a sadhu, even though such a person may be
neither learned nor well cultured. As far as the atheistic are concerned, it is
not necessary for the Supreme Lord to appear as He is to destroy them, as He
did with the demons Ravana and Kamsa. The Lord has many agents who are
quite competent to vanquish demons. But the Lord especially descends to
appease His unalloyed devotees, who are always harassed by the demoniac. The
demon harasses the devotee, even though the latter may happen to be his kin.
Although Prahlada Maharaja was the son of Hiranyakasipu, he was
nonetheless persecuted by his father; although Devaki, the mother of Krsna,
was the sister of Kamsa, she and her husband Vasudeva were persecuted only
because Krsna was to be born of them. 80 Lord Krsna appeared primarily to
deliver Devaki, rather than kill Kamsa, but both were performed
simultaneously. Therefore it is said here that to deliver the devotee and
vanquish the demon miscreants, the Lord appears in different incarnations.

In the Caitanya—caritc‘tmrta of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, the following verses
(Madhya 20.263—264) summarize these principles of incarnation:

srsti—hetu yei mﬁrti prapaﬁce avatare
sei is’vara—mmti ‘avatc‘tra’ hama dhare

mciyc‘ttita paravyome sabc‘wa avasthc‘ma
vis’ve avatari’ dhare ‘avatc‘tra’ hama

“The avatc'wa, or incarnation of Godhead, descends from the kingdom of
God for material manifestation. And the particular form of the Personality of
Godhead who so descends is called an incarnation, or avatc'n'a. Such
incarnations are situated in the spiritual world, the kingdom of God. When
they descend to the material creation, they assume the name avatc'wa.”

There are various kinds of avatc‘was, such as purusc‘watc‘tras, guhavatc‘was,
lilavatc‘tras, s’akty—c‘wes’a avatc‘tras, mahvahtara—avatc‘was and yugc‘watc‘was—all



appearing on schedule all over the universe. But Lord Krsna is the primeval
Lord, the fountainhead of all avatc'tras. Lord Sri Krsna descends for the specific
purpose of mitigating the anxieties of the pure devotees, who are very anxious
to see Him in His original Vrndavana pastimes. Therefore, the prime purpose
of the Krsna avatc'n'a is to satisfy His unalloyed devotees.

The Lord says that He incarnates Himself in every millennium. This
indicates that He incarnates also in the Age of Kali. As stated in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, the incarnation in the Age of Kali is Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who spread the worship of Krsna by the sahkirtcma movement
(congregational chanting of the holy names) and spread Krsna consciousness
throughout India. He predicted that this culture of sahkirtcma would be
broadcast all over the world, from town to town and Village to Village. Lord
Caitanya as the incarnation of Krsna, the Personality of Godhead, is described
secretly but not directly in the confidential parts of the revealed scriptures,
such as the Upcmisads, Mahabharata and Bhagavatam. The devotees of Lord
Krsna are very much attracted by the sahkirtaha movement of Lord Caitanya.
This avatc'n'a of the Lord does not kill the miscreants, but delivers them by His
causeless mercy.

TEXT 9

wﬁaﬁﬁaﬁdﬁiaﬁiamzl
aaéa‘gﬁmf‘rﬁrmﬁﬁra‘isa‘ﬁuqu

jcmma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah

tyaktvc‘t deham puhar jahma
haiti mam eti so ’rjuha

SYNONYMS

jahma—birth; karma—work; ca—also; me—of Mine; divyam—transcendental;
evam—like this; yah—anyone who; vetti—knows; tattvatah—in reality;



tyaktvc‘t—leaving aside; deham—this body; puhah—again; jahma—birth;
ha—never; eti—does attain; mcim—unto Me; eti—does attain; sah—he;
arjuha—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

One Who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but
attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.

PURPORT

The Lord’s descent from His transcendental abode is already explained in
the 6th verse. One who can understand the truth of the appearance of the
Personality of Godhead is already liberated from material bondage, and
therefore he returns to the kingdom of God immediately after quitting this
present material body. Such liberation of the living entity from material
bondage is not at all easy. The impersonalists and the yogis attain liberation
only after much trouble and many, many births. Even then, the liberation they
achieve—merging into the impersonal brahmajyoti of the Lord—is only
partial, and there is the risk of returning to this material world. But the
devotee, simply by understanding the transcendental nature of the body and
activities of the Lord, attains the abode of the Lord after ending this body and
does not run the risk of returning to this material world. In the
Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.33) it is stated that the Lord has many, many forms and
incarnations: advaitam acyutam ahadim ahahta-rﬁpam. Although there are
many transcendental forms of the Lord, they are still one and the same
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One has to understand this fact with
conviction, although it is incomprehensible to mundane scholars and empiric
philosophers. As stated in the Vedas (Pmusa—bodhihi Upahisad):

eko devo hitya-lilc‘mmakto
bhakta-vyc‘tpi hrdy antar—c‘ttmc‘t

“The one Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally engaged in many,



many transcendental forms in relationships with His unalloyed devotees.” This
Vedic version is confirmed in this verse of the Gitc't personally by the Lord. He
who accepts this truth on the strength of the authority of the Vedas and of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and who does not waste time in philosophical
speculations attains the highest perfectional stage of liberation. Simply by
accepting this truth on faith, one can, without a doubt, attain liberation. The
Vedic version tat tvam asi is actually applied in this case. Anyone who
understands Lord Krsna to be the Supreme, or who says unto the Lord “You
are the same Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead,” is certainly
liberated instantly, and consequently his entrance into the transcendental
association of the Lord is guaranteed. In other words, such a faithful devotee of
the Lord attains perfection, and this is confirmed by the following Vedic
assertion:

tam eva Uiditvc‘tti mrtyum eti
hc‘myah panthc‘t vidyate ’ycmc‘tya

“One can attain the perfect stage of liberation from birth and death simply
by knowing the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and there is no
other way to achieve this perfection.” (gvetéivatara Upam'saa 3.8) That there
is no alternative means that anyone who does not understand Lord Krsna as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is surely in the mode of ignorance and
consequently he will not attain salvation simply, so to speak, by licking the
outer surface of the bottle of honey, or by interpreting the Bhagavad-gitc‘t
according to mundane scholarship. Such empiric philosophers may assume
very important roles in the material world, but they are not necessarily eligible
for liberation. Such puffed-up mundane scholars have to wait for the causeless
mercy of the devotee of the Lord. One should therefore cultivate Krsna
consciousness with faith and knowledge, and in this way attain perfection.

TEXT 10

memn



WWWWWHHMI

vita-rc‘tga—bhaya—krodhc‘t
mah-mayc‘t mam upc‘ts’ritc‘th
bahavo jﬁc‘ma-tapasc‘t
pﬁtc‘t mad—bhc‘wam cigatc‘th

SYNONYMS

Uita—freed from; rc‘tga—attachment; bhaya—fear; krodhc‘Ih—and anger;
mat—mayc‘t—fully in Me; mam—in Me; upc‘ts’ritc‘th—being fully situated;
bahavah—many; jﬁc‘ma—of knowledge; tapasc't—by the penance; pﬁtc‘th—being
purified; mat-bhavam—transcendental love for Me; cigatc'th—attained.

TRANSLATION

Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me and
taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past became purified by
knowledge of Me—and thus they all attained transcendental love for Me.

PURPORT

As described above, it is very difficult for a person who is too materially
affected to understand the personal nature of the Supreme Absolute Truth.
Generally, people who are attached to the bodily conception of life are so
absorbed in materialism that it is almost impossible for them to understand
how the Supreme can be a person. Such materialists cannot even imagine that
there is a transcendental body which is imperishable, full of knowledge and
eternally blissful. In the materialistic concept, the body is perishable, full of
ignorance and completely miserable. Therefore, people in general keep this
same bodily idea in mind when they are informed of the personal form of the
Lord. For such materialistic men, the form of the gigantic material
manifestation is supreme. Consequently they consider the Supreme to be
impersonal. And because they are too materially absorbed, the conception of



retaining the personality after liberation from matter frightens them. When
they are informed that spiritual life is also individual and personal, they
become afraid of becoming persons again, and so they naturally prefer a kind
of merging into the impersonal void. Generally, they compare the living
entities to the bubbles of the ocean, which merge into the ocean. That is the
highest perfection of spiritual existence attainable without individual
personality. This is a kind of fearful stage of life, devoid of perfect knowledge
of spiritual existence. Furthermore there are many persons who cannot
understand spiritual existence at all. Being embarrassed by so many theories
and by contradictions of various types of philosophical speculation, they
become disgusted or angry and foolishly conclude that there is no supreme
cause and that everything is ultimately void. Such people are in a diseased
condition of life. Some people are too materially attached and therefore do not
give attention to spiritual life, some of them want to merge into the supreme
spiritual cause, and some of them disbelieve in everything, being angry at all
sorts of spiritual speculation out of hopelessness. This last class of men take to
the shelter of some kind of intoxication, and their affective hallucinations are
sometimes accepted as spiritual Vision. One has to get rid of all three stages of
attachment to the material world: negligence of spiritual life, fear of a spiritual
personal identity, and the conception of void that arises from frustration in
life. To get free from these three stages of the material concept of life, one has
to take complete shelter of the Lord, guided by the bona fide spiritual master,
and follow the disciplines and regulative principles of devotional life. The last
stage of the devotional life is called bhc‘wa, or transcendental love of Godhead.

According to Bbakti—rasﬁmrta-smdbu (1.4.15—16), the science of devotional
serV1ce:

adau s’raddhc‘t tatah sadhu—
sahgo ’tha bhajaha—kriyci
tato ’hartha—hivrttih syc‘tt
tato m'sthc‘t mcis tatah

athasaktis tato bhc‘was
tatah premabhyudaﬁcati



sadhakc‘mc‘tm ayam premhah
prc‘tdmbhc‘we bhavet kramah

“In the beginning one must have a preliminary desire for self-realization.
This will bring one to the stage of trying to associate with persons who are
spiritually elevated. In the next stage one becomes initiated by an elevated
spiritual master, and under his instruction the neophyte devotee begins the
process of devotional service. By execution of devotional service under the
guidance of the spiritual master, one becomes free from all material
attachment, attains steadiness in self-realization, and acquires a taste for
hearing about the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. This taste leads
one further forward to attachment for Krsna consciousness, which is matured
in bhc‘wa, or the preliminary stage of transcendental love of God. Real love for
God is called prema, the highest perfectional stage of life.” In the prema stage
there is constant engagement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
80, by the slow process of devotional service, under the guidance of the bona
fide spiritual master, one can attain the highest stage, being freed from all
material attachment, from the fearfulness of one’s individual spiritual
personality, and from the frustrations that result in void philosophy. Then one
can ultimately attain to the abode of the Supreme Lord.

TEXT 11

ﬁumwmﬁamaaWI
WWW: 1119913613: || 99 ||

ye yathc‘t mam prapadyahte
tc‘m’ts tathaiva bhajamy aham
mama vartmc‘muvartahte
manusyc‘th pc‘wtha sarvas’ah

SYNONYMS
ye—all who; yathc‘t—as; mam—unto Me; prapadyahte—surrender; tc‘m—them;



tathc‘t—so; eva—certainly; bhajami—reward; aham—I; mama—My;
vartma—path; ahuvartahte—follow; manusyc‘th—all men; pc‘wtha—O son of
Prtha; sarvas’ah—in all respects.

TRANSLATION

As all surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone follows My
path in all respects, 0 son of Prtha.

PURPORT

Everyone is searching for Krsna in the different aspects of His
manifestations. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is partially
realized in His impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence and as the all-pervading
Supersoul dwelling within everything, including the particles of atoms. But
Krsna is fully realized only by His pure devotees. Consequently, Krsna is the
object of everyone’s realization, and thus anyone and everyone is satisfied
according to one’s desire to have Him. In the transcendental world also, Krsna
reciprocates with His pure devotees in the transcendental attitude, just as the
devotee wants Him. One devotee may want Krsna as supreme master, another
as his personal friend, another as his son, and still another as his lover. Krsna
rewards all the devotees equally, according to their different intensities of love
for Him. In the material world, the same reciprocations of feelings are there,
and they are equally exchanged by the Lord with the different types of
worshipers. The pure devotees both here and in the transcendental abode
associate with Him in person and are able to render personal service to the
Lord and thus derive transcendental bliss in His loving service. As for those
who are impersonalists and who want to commit spiritual suicide by
annihilating the individual existence of the living entity, Krsna helps also by
absorbing them into His effulgence. Such impersonalists do not agree to accept
the eternal, blissful Personality of Godhead; consequently they cannot relish
the bliss of transcendental personal service to the Lord, having extinguished
their individuality. Some of them, who are not firmly situated even in the
impersonal existence, return to this material field to exhibit their dormant



desires for activities. They are not admitted into the spiritual planets, but they
are again given a chance to act on the material planets. For those who are
fruitive workers, the Lord awards the desired results of their prescribed duties,
as the yajﬁes’vai'a; and those who are yogis seeking mystic powers are awarded
such powers. In other words, everyone is dependent for success upon His mercy
alone, and all kinds of spiritual processes are but different degrees of success on
the same path. Unless, therefore, one comes to the highest perfection of Krsna
consciousness, all attempts remain imperfect, as is stated in the

grimad-Bbéga vatam (2.3.10):

akc‘tmah sarva—kc‘tmo vc‘t

moksa—kc‘tma udara-dhih
tiweha bhakti-yogeha
yajeta purusam param

“Whether one is without desire [the condition of the devotees], or is
desirous of all fruitive results, or is after liberation, one should with all efforts
try to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead for complete perfection,
culminating in Krsna consciousness.”

TEXT 12

szﬁuﬁﬁrﬁimseéamw
fﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁaﬁﬁrﬁgﬁﬁﬁrmunu

kahksahtah karmahc‘tm siddhim
yajcmta iha devatc‘th
ksipram hi manuse loke
siddhir bhavati karma—jc‘t

SYNONYMS

kahksahtah—desiring; karmahc‘tm—of fruitive activities; siddhim—perfection;
yajcmte—they worship by sacrifices; iha—in the material world; devatc'th—the
demigods; ksipram—very quickly; hi—certainly; mc‘muse—in human society;



loke—within this world; siddhih—success; bhavati—comes; karma-jc‘t—from
fruitive work.

TRANSLATION

Men in this world desire success in fruitive activities, and therefore they
worship the demigods. Quickly, of course, men get results from fruitive work in
this world.

PURPORT

There is a great misconception about the gods or demigods of this material
world, and men of less intelligence, although passing as great scholars, take
these demigods to be various forms of the Supreme Lord. Actually, the
demigods are not different forms of God, but they are God’s different parts and
parcels. God is one, and the parts and parcels are many. The Vedas say, m'tyo
hityc‘mdm: God is one. Is’varah paramah krshah. The Supreme God is
one—Krsna—and the demigods are delegated with powers to manage this
material world. These demigods are all living entities (hityc'mc'tm) with different
grades of material power. They cannot be equal to the Supreme
God—Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna. Anyone who thinks that God and the
demigods are on the same level is called an atheist, or pasahdi. Even the great
demigods like Brahma and Siva cannot be compared to the Supreme Lord. In
fact, the Lord is worshiped by demigods such as Brahma and Siva
(s’an-Uiriﬁci-hutam). Yet curiously enough there are many human leaders who
are worshiped by foolish men under the misunderstanding of
anthropomorphism or zoomorphism. Iha devatc'th denotes a powerful man or
demigod of this material world. But Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, does not belong to this world. He is above, or
transcendental to, material creation. Even Sripada Sankaracarya, the leader of
the impersonalists, maintains that Narayana, or Krsna, is beyond this material
creation. However, foolish people (hrta-jﬁc‘ma) worship the demigods because
they want immediate results. They get the results, but do not know that results
so obtained are temporary and are meant for less intelligent persons. The



intelligent person is in Krsna consciousness, and he has no need to worship the
paltry demigods for some immediate, temporary benefit. The demigods of this
material world, as well as their worshipers, will vanish with the annihilation of
this material world. The boons of the demigods are material and temporary.
Both the material worlds and their inhabitants, including the demigods and
their worshipers, are bubbles in the cosmic ocean. In this world, however,
human society is mad after temporary things such as the material opulence of
possessing land, family and enjoyable paraphernalia. To achieve such
temporary things, people worship the demigods or powerful men in human
society. If a man gets some ministership in the government by worshiping a
political leader, he considers that he has achieved a great boon. All of them are
therefore kowtowing to the so-called leaders or “big guns” in order to achieve
temporary boons, and they indeed achieve such things. Such foolish men are
not interested in Krsna consciousness for the permanent solution to the
hardships of material existence. They are all after sense enjoyment, and to get
a little facility for sense enjoyment they are attracted to worship empowered
living entities known as demigods. This verse indicates that people are rarely
interested in Krsna consciousness. They are mostly interested in material
enjoyment, and therefore they worship some powerful living entity.

TEXT 13

Wweﬁmﬁﬁmu
mmmmueau

cc‘Itur—vamyam mayc‘t systam
guha—karma—vibhc‘tgas’ah
tasya kartc‘tmm api mam

viddhy akartc‘tram avyayam

SYNONYMS

cc‘ttuh—vamyam—the four divisions of human society; maya—by Me;



srstam—created; guha—of quality; karma—and work; vibhc‘tgas’ah—in terms of
division; tasya—of that; kartc‘tram—the father; api—although; mam—Me;
viddhi—you may know; akartc‘tram—as the nondoer; avyayam—unchangeable.

TRANSLATION

According to the three modes of material nature and the work associated
With them, the four divisions of human society are created by Me. And
although I am the creator of this system, you should know that I am yet the
nondoer, being unchangeable.

PURPORT

The Lord is the creator of everything. Everything is born of Him,
everything is sustained by Him, and everything, after annihilation, rests in
Him. He is therefore the creator of the four divisions of the social order,
beginning with the intelligent class of men, technically called brc‘thmahas due
to their being situated in the mode of goodness. Next is the administrative
class, technically called the ksati'iyas due to their being situated in the mode of
passion. The mercantile men, called the vais’yas, are situated in the mixed
modes of passion and ignorance, and the s’ﬁdras, or laborer class, are situated in
the ignorant mode of material nature. In spite of His creating the four
divisions of human society, Lord Krsna does not belong to any of these
divisions, because He is not one of the conditioned souls, a section of whom
form human society. Human society is similar to any other animal society, but
to elevate men from the animal status, the above-mentioned divisions are
created by the Lord for the systematic development of Krsna consciousness.
The tendency of a particular man toward work is determined by the modes of
material nature which he has acquired. Such symptoms of life, according to the
different modes of material nature, are described in the Eighteenth Chapter of
this book. A person in Krsna consciousness, however, is above even the
brc‘thmahas. Although brc‘thmahas by quality are supposed to know about
Brahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth, most of them approach only the
impersonal Brahman manifestation of Lord Krsna. But a man who transcends



the limited knowledge of a brc‘thmaha and reaches the knowledge of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna, becomes a person in Krsna
consciousness—or, in other words, a Vaisnava. Krsna consciousness includes
knowledge of all different plenary expansions of Krsna, namely Rama,
Nrsimha, Varaha, etc. And as Krsna is transcendental to this system of the
four divisions of human society, a person in Krsna consciousness is also
transcendental to all divisions of human society, whether we consider the
divisions of community, nation or species.

TEXT 14

qmmmaammI
eﬁrniaismmﬁrﬁiﬁﬁaawﬁuwu

ha mam karmahi limpahti

ha me karma—phale sprhc‘t
iti mam yo ’bhijc‘mc‘tti

karmabhir ha sa badhyate

SYNONYMS

ha—never; mam—Me; karmahi—all kinds of work; limpahti—do affect;
ha—nor; me—My; karma-phale—in fruitive action; sprhc‘t—aspiration;
iti—thus; mam—Me; yah—one who; abhijc‘mciti—does know; karmabhih—by
the reaction of such work; ha—never; sah—he; badhyate—becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

There is no work that affects Me; nor do I aspire for the fruits of action.
One Who understands this truth about Me also does not become entangled in
the fruitive reactions of work.

PURPORT



As there are constitutional laws in the material world stating that the king
can do no wrong, or that the king is not subject to the state laws, similarly the
Lord, although He is the creator of this material world, is not affected by the
activities of the material world. He creates and remains aloof from the
creation, whereas the living entities are entangled in the fruitive results of
material activities because of their propensity for lording it over material
resources. The proprietor of an establishment is not responsible for the right
and wrong activities of the workers, but the workers are themselves
responsible. The living entities are engaged in their respective activities of
sense gratification, and these activities are not ordained by the Lord. For
advancement of sense gratification, the living entities are engaged in the work
of this world, and they aspire to heavenly happiness after death. The Lord,
being full in Himself, has no attraction for so-called heavenly happiness. The
heavenly demigods are only His engaged servants. The proprietor never desires
the low-grade happiness such as the workers may desire. He is aloof from the
material actions and reactions. For example, the rains are not responsible for
different types of vegetation that appear on the earth, although without such
rains there is no possibility of vegetative growth. Vedic smrti confirms this fact
as follows:

himitta-mc‘ttram evc‘tsau
srjyc‘mc‘tm sarga-karmahi
pradhc‘ma—kc‘wahi—bhﬁtc‘t
yato vai srjya—s’aktayah

“In the material creations, the Lord is only the supreme cause. The
immediate cause is material nature, by which the cosmic manifestation is made
Visible.” The created beings are of many varieties, such as the demigods,
human beings and lower animals, and all of them are subject to the reactions
of their past good or bad activities. The Lord only gives them the proper
facilities for such activities and the regulations of the modes of nature, but He
is never responsible for their past and present activities. In the Vedanta-sﬁtra
(2.1.34) it is confirmed, vaisamya—hairghmye ha scipeksatvc‘tt: the Lord is never
partial to any living entity. The living entity is responsible for his own acts.



The Lord only gives him facilities, through the agency of material nature, the
external energy. Anyone who is fully conversant with all the intricacies of this
law of karma, or fruitive activities, does not become affected by the results of
his activities. In other words, the person who understands this transcendental
nature of the Lord is an experienced man in Krsna consciousness, and thus he
is never subjected to the laws of karma. One who does not know the
transcendental nature of the Lord and who thinks that the activities of the
Lord are aimed at fruitive results, as are the activities of the ordinary living
entities, certainly becomes entangled himself in fruitive reactions. But one
who knows the Supreme Truth is a liberated soul fixed in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 15

Wwyiw‘uﬁ‘rﬁggqﬁrzl
wﬁmﬁﬁaﬁwuwu

evam jﬁc‘ttvc‘t krtam karma

pﬁrvair api mumuksubhih
kum karmaiva tasmdt tvam
pﬁrvaih pﬁrvataram krtam

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; jﬁc‘ttvc‘t—knowing well; krtam—was performed; karma—work;
pﬁrvaih—by past authorities; api—indeed; mumuksubhih—who attained
liberation; kum—just perform; karma—prescribed duty; eva—certainly;
tasmc‘It—therefore; tvam—you; pﬁrvaih—by the predecessors; pﬁrva—tamm—in
ancient times; krtam—as performed.

TRANSLATION

All the liberated souls in ancient times acted With this understanding of My
transcendental nature. Therefore you should perform your duty, following in
their footsteps.



PURPORT

There are two classes of men. Some of them are full of polluted material
things within their hearts, and some of them are materially free. Krsna
consciousness is equally beneficial for both of these persons. Those who are full
of dirty things can take to the line of Krsna consciousness for a gradual
cleansing process, following the regulative principles of devotional service.
Those who are already cleansed of the impurities may continue to act in the
same Krsna consciousness so that others may follow their exemplary activities
and thereby be benefited. Foolish persons or neophytes in Krsna consciousness
often want to retire from activities without having knowledge of Krsna
consciousness. Arjuna’s desire to retire from activities on the battlefield was
not approved by the Lord. One need only know how to act. To retire from the
activities of Krsna consciousness and to sit aloof making a show of Krsna
consciousness is less important than actually engaging in the field of activities
for the sake of Krsna. Arjuna is here advised to act in Krsna consciousness,
following in the footsteps of the Lord’s previous disciples, such as the sun-god
Vivasvan, as mentioned hereinbefore. The Supreme Lord knows all His past
activities, as well as those of persons who acted in Krsna consciousness in the
past. Therefore He recommends the acts of the sun-god, who learned this art
from the Lord some millions of years before. All such students of Lord Krsna
are mentioned here as past liberated persons, engaged in the discharge of
duties allotted by Krsna.

TEXT 16

ﬁﬁmﬁﬁmsmfrﬁml
aﬁaﬁnamﬁamfriaaﬁswu 95 ||

kim karma kim akarmeti
kavayo ’py atra mohitc‘th
tat te karma pravaksyc‘tmi



yaj jﬁc‘ttvc‘t moksyase ’s’ubhc‘tt

SYNONYMS

kim—what is; karma—action; kim—what is; akarma—inaction; iti—thus;
kavayah—the intelligent; api—also; atra—in this matter; mohitc‘Ih—are
bewildered; tat—that; te—unto you; karma—work; pravaksyc‘tmi—I shall
explain; yat—which; jﬁc‘ttvc‘I—knowing; moksyase—you will be liberated;
as’ubhc'tt—from ill fortune.

TRANSLATION

Even the intelligent are bewildered in determining What is action and What is
inaction. Now I shall explain to you What action is, knowing Which you shall be
liberated from all misfortune.

PURPORT

Action in Krsna consciousness has to be executed in accord with the
examples of previous bona fide devotees. This is recommended in the 15th
verse. Why such action should not be independent will be explained in the
text to follow.

To act in Krsna consciousness, one has to follow the leadership of
authorized persons who are in a line of disciplic succession as explained in the
beginning of this chapter. The system of Krsna consciousness was first
narrated to the sun-god, the sun-god explained it to his son Manu, Manu
explained it to his son Iksvaku, and the system is current on this earth from
that very remote time. Therefore, one has to follow in the footsteps of previous
authorities in the line of disciplic succession. Otherwise even the most
intelligent men will be bewildered regarding the standard actions of Krsna
consciousness. For this reason, the Lord decided to instruct Arjuna in Krsna
consciousness directly. Because of the direct instruction of the Lord to Arjuna,
anyone who follows in the footsteps of Arjuna is certainly not bewildered.

It is said that one cannot ascertain the ways of religion simply by imperfect



experimental knowledge. Actually, the principles of religion can only be laid
down by the Lord Himself. Dharmam tu saksc‘td bhagavat—prahitam (Bbég.
6.3.19). No one can manufacture a religious principle by imperfect speculation.
One must follow in the footsteps of great authorities like Brahma, Siva,
Narada, Manu, the Kumaras, Kapila, Prahlada, Bhisma, Sukadeva Gosvami,
Yamaraja, Janaka, and Bali Maharaja. By mental speculation one cannot
ascertain what is religion or self-realization. Therefore, out of causeless mercy
to His devotees, the Lord explains directly to Arjuna what action is and what
inaction is. Only action performed in Krsna consciousness can deliver a person
from the entanglement of material existence.

TEXT 17

WﬁaﬁWWHWn
Whammmwﬁrzuwu

karmaho hy api boddhavyam

boddhavyam ca vikarmahah

akarmahas’ ca boddhavyam
gahcmc‘t karmaho gatih

SYNONYMS

karmahah—of work; hi—certainly; api—also; boddhavyam—should be
understood; boddhavyam—should be understood; ca—also; vikarmahah—of
forbidden work; akarmahah—of inaction; ca—also; boddhavyam—should be
understood; gahcmci—very difficult; karmahah—of work; gatih—entrance.

TRANSLATION

The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one should
know properly What action is, What forbidden action is, and What inaction is.

PURPORT



If one is serious about liberation from material bondage, one has to
understand the distinctions between action, inaction and unauthorized
actions. One has to apply oneself to such an analysis of action, reaction and
perverted actions because it is a very difficult subject matter. To understand
Krsna consciousness and action according to its modes, one has to learn one’s
relationship with the Supreme; i.e., one who has learned perfectly knows that
every living entity is an eternal servitor of the Lord and that consequently one
has to act in Krsna consciousness. The entire Bhagavad-gitc‘t is directed toward
this conclusion. Any other conclusions, against this consciousness and its
attendant actions, are Uikarmas, or prohibited actions. To understand all this
one has to associate with authorities in Krsna consciousness and learn the
secret from them; this is as good as learning from the Lord directly. Otherwise,
even the most intelligent persons will be bewildered.

TEXT 18

Wazwﬁmﬁiaﬁau
HWHﬁtﬁmHFH

karmahy akarma yah pas’yed
akarmahi ca karma yah
sa buddhimc‘m manusyesu

sa yuktah krtsha-karma-krt

SYNONYMS

karmahi—in action; akarma—inaction; yah—one who; pas’yet—observes;
akarmahi—in inaction; ca—also; karma—fruitive action; yah—one who;
sah—he; buddhi—mdh—is intelligent; manusyesu—in human society; sah—he;
yuktah—is in the transcendental position; krtsha—karma—th—although
engaged in all activities.

TRANSLATION



One Who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent among
men, and he is in the transcendental position, although engaged in all sorts of
activities.

PURPORT

A person acting in Krsna consciousness is naturally free from the bonds of
karma. His activities are all performed for Krsna; therefore he does not enjoy
or suffer any of the effects of work. Consequently he is intelligent in human
society, even though he is engaged in all sorts of activities for Krsna. Akm‘ma
means without reaction to work. The impersonalist ceases fruitive activities
out of fear, so that the resultant action may not be a stumbling block on the
path of self-realization, but the personalist knows rightly his position as the
eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he engages
himself in the activities of Krsna consciousness. Because everything is done for
Krsna, he enjoys only transcendental happiness in the discharge of this
service. Those who are engaged in this process are known to be without desire
for personal sense gratification. The sense of eternal servitorship to Krsna
makes one immune to all sorts of reactionary elements of work.

TEXT 19

maﬁmzwﬁml
szqﬁsﬁwzmqu

yasya sarve samarambhc‘th
kama—sahkalpa—varjitdh
jﬁahaghi—dagdha—karmaham
tam c‘Ihuh pahditam budhc‘th

SYNONYMS

yasya—one whose; sarve—all sorts of; samarambhc‘th—attempts; kama—based



on desire for sense gratification; sahkalpa—determination; varjitc'th—are
devoid of; jﬁc‘ma—of perfect knowledge; aghi—by the fire; dagdha—burned;
karmc‘mam—whose work; tam—him; ahuh—declare; pahditam—learned;

budhc‘th—those who know.

TRANSLATION

One is understood to be in full knowledge Whose every endeavor is devoid of
desire for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be a worker for Whom the
reactions of work have been burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.

PURPORT

Only a person in full knowledge can understand the activities of a person in
Krsna consciousness. Because the person in Krsna consciousness is devoid of
all kinds of sense-gratificatory propensities, it is to be understood that he has
burned up the reactions of his work by perfect knowledge of his constitutional
position as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is
actually learned who has attained to such perfection of knowledge.
Development of this knowledge of eternal servitorship to the Lord is compared
to fire. Such a fire, once kindled, can burn up all kinds of reactions to work.

TEXT 20

WWWWMI
Wsﬁﬁamﬁaz M Q0 N

tyaktvc‘t karma—phaldsahgam
hitya—trpto hirc‘Is’rayah
karmahy abhipravrtto ’pi
haiva kiﬁcit karoti sah

SYNONYMS



tyaktvc‘t—having given up; karma—phala—cisahgam—attachment for fruitive
results; m'tya—always; trptah—being satisfied; hirc‘Is’rayah—without any
shelter; karmahi—in activity; abhipravrttah—being fully engaged; api—in
spite of; ha—does not; eva—certainly; kiﬁcit—anything; karoti—do; sah—he.

TRANSLATION

Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever satisfied and
independent, he performs no fruitive action, although engaged in all kinds of
undertakings.

PURPORT

This freedom from the bondage of actions is possible only in Krsna
consciousness, when one is doing everything for Krsna. A Krsna conscious
person acts out of pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
therefore he has no attraction for the results of the action. He is not even
attached to his personal maintenance, for everything is left to Krsna. Nor is he
anxious to secure things, nor to protect things already in his possession. He
does his duty to the best of his ability and leaves everything to Krsna. Such an
unattached person is always free from the resultant reactions of good and bad;
it is as though he were not doing anything. This is the sign of akarma, or
actions without fruitive reactions. Any other action, therefore, devoid of
Krsna consciousness, is binding upon the worker, and that is the real aspect of
Uikarma, as explained hereinbefore.

TEXT 21

WWWWH
wmwmeemum

hirc‘ts’ir yata—cittc‘ttmc‘t
tyakta-sarva—parigrahah
s’c‘triram kevalam karma



kurvcm mipnoti kilbisam

SYNONYMS

hirc'ts’ih—without desire for the result; yata—controlled; Citta-c'ttmc't—mind and
intelligence; tyakta—giving up; sarva—all; parigrahah—sense of
proprietorship over possessions; s’c‘wiram—in keeping body and soul together;
kevalam—only; karma—work; kmvcm—doing; ha—never; dphoti—does
acquire; kilbisam—sinful reactions.

TRANSLATION

Such a man of understanding acts With mind and intelligence perfectly
controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessions, and acts
only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is not affected by sinful
reactions.

PURPORT

A Krsna conscious person does not expect good or bad results in his
activities. His mind and intelligence are fully controlled. He knows that
because he is part and parcel of the Supreme, the part played by him, as a part
and parcel of the whole, is not his own activity but is only being done through
him by the Supreme. When the hand moves, it does not move out of its own
accord, but by the endeavor of the whole body. A Krsna conscious person is
always dovetailed with the supreme desire, for he has no desire for personal
sense gratification. He moves exactly like a part of a machine. As a machine
part requires oiling and cleaning for maintenance, so a Krsna conscious man
maintains himself by his work just to remain fit for action in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord. He is therefore immune to all the
reactions of his endeavors. Like an animal, he has no proprietorship even over
his own body. A cruel proprietor of an animal sometimes kills the animal in his
possession, yet the animal does not protest. Nor does it have any real
independence. A Krsna conscious person, fully engaged in self-realization, has



very little time to falsely possess any material object. For maintaining body and
soul, he does not require unfair means of accumulating money. He does not,
therefore, become contaminated by such material sins. He is free from all
reactions to his actions.

TEXT 22

WWW”
mtiﬁmﬁtﬁﬁwﬁﬁﬁawﬁuuu

yadrcchc‘t—lc‘tbha—sahtusto
dvahdvc‘ttito vimatsarah
samah siddhc‘w asiddhau ca
krtvc‘tpi ha hibadhyate

SYNONYMS

yadrcchd—out of its own accord; labha—with gain; sahtustah—satisfied;
dvahdva—duality; atitah—surpassed; vimatsarah—free from envy;
samah—steady; siddhau—in success; asiddhau—failure; ca—also;
krtvc‘t—doing; api—although; ha—never; hibadhyate—becomes affected.

TRANSLATION

He Who is satisfied With gain Which comes of its own accord, Who is free
from duality and does not envy, Who is steady in both success and failure, is
never entangled, although performing actions.

PURPORT

A Krsna conscious person does not make much endeavor even to maintain
his body. He is satisfied with gains which are obtained of their own accord. He
neither begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far as is in his power, and is
satisfied with whatever is obtained by his own honest labor. He is therefore



independent in his livelihood. He does not allow anyone’s service to hamper
his own service in Krsna consciousness. However, for the service of the Lord
he can participate in any kind of action without being disturbed by the duality
of the material world. The duality of the material world is felt in terms of heat
and cold, or misery and happiness. A Krsna conscious person is above duality
because he does not hesitate to act in any way for the satisfaction of Krsna.
Therefore he is steady both in success and in failure. These signs are Visible
when one is fully in transcendental knowledge.

TEXT 23

WWWH
szmmmu

gata—sahgasya muktasya
jﬁc‘mc‘wasthita—cetasah
yajﬁciycicaratah karma
samagram praviliyate

SYNONYMS

gata-sahgasya—of one unattached to the modes of material nature;
muktasya—of the liberated; jﬁc‘ma—avasthita—situated in transcendence;
cetasah—whose wisdom; yajﬁc‘tya—for the sake of Yajﬁa (Krsna);
cicaratah—acting; karma—work; samagram—in total; praviliyate—merges
entirely.

TRANSLATION

The work of a man Who is unattached to the modes of material nature and
Who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely into
transcendence.

PURPORT



Becoming fully Krsna conscious, one is freed from all dualities and thus is
free from the contaminations of the material modes. He can become liberated
because he knows his constitutional position in relationship with Krsna, and
thus his mind cannot be drawn from Krsna consciousness. Consequently,
whatever he does, he does for Krsna, who is the primeval Visnu. Therefore, all
his works are technically sacrifices because sacrifice aims at satisfying the
Supreme Person, Visnu, Krsna. The resultant reactions to all such work
certainly merge into transcendence, and one does not suffer material effects.

TEXT 24

mﬁsaaﬁa‘anﬁamigam
aﬁaﬁqmmﬁmuqeu

brahmc‘trpaham brahma havir

brahmc‘tghau brahmahc‘t hutam
brahmaiva teha gahtavyam
brahma-karma—samc‘tdhim‘t

SYNONYMS

brahma—spiritual in nature; arpaham—contribution; brahma—the Supreme;
havih—butter; brahma—spiritual; aghau—in the fire of consummation;
brahmahc‘t—by the spirit soul; hutam—offered; brahma—spiritual kingdom;
eva—certainly; teha—by him; gahtavyam—to be reached; brahma—spiritual;
karma—in activities; samadhihc‘t—by complete absorption.

TRANSLATION

A person Who is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness is sure to attain the
spiritual kingdom because of his full contribution to spiritual activities, in
Which the consummation is absolute and that Which is offered is of the same
spiritual nature.



PURPORT

How activities in Krsna consciousness can lead one ultimately to the
spiritual goal is described here. There are various activities in Krsna
consciousness, and all of them will be described in the following verses. But,
for the present, just the principle of Krsna consciousness is described. A
conditioned soul, entangled in material contamination, is sure to act in the
material atmosphere, and yet he has to get out of such an environment. The
process by which the conditioned soul can get out of the material atmosphere
is Krsna consciousness. For example, a patient who is suffering from a disorder
of the bowels due to overindulgence in milk products is cured by another milk
product, namely curds. The materially absorbed conditioned soul can be cured
by Krsna consciousness as set forth here in the Gita. This process is generally
known as yajﬁa, or activities (sacrifices) simply meant for the satisfaction of
Visnu, or Krsna. The more the activities of the material world are performed
in Krsna consciousness, or for Visnu only, the more the atmosphere becomes
spiritualized by complete absorption. The word brahma (Brahman) means
“spiritual.” The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of His transcendental body are
called brahmajyoti, His spiritual effulgence. Everything that exists is situated in
that brahmajyoti, but when the jyoti is covered by illusion (mciyc‘t) or sense
gratification, it is called material. This material veil can be removed at once by
Krsna consciousness; thus the offering for the sake of Krsna consciousness, the
consuming agent of such an offering or contribution, the process of
consumption, the contributor, and the result are—all combined
together—Brahman, or the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth covered by
mciyc't is called matter. Matter dovetailed for the cause of the Absolute Truth
regains its spiritual quality. Krsna consciousness is the process of converting
the illusory consciousness into Brahman, or the Supreme. When the mind is
fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness, it is said to be in samadhi, or trance.
Anything done in such transcendental consciousness is called yajﬁa, or
sacrifice for the Absolute. In that condition of spiritual consciousness, the
contributor, the contribution, the consumption, the performer or leader of the
performance, and the result or ultimate gain—everything—becomes one in



the Absolute, the Supreme Brahman. That is the method of Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 25

WWW2WI
mﬁﬁaﬁﬁﬁeﬁruwu

daivam evc‘tpare yajﬁam
yogihah paryupc‘tsate
brahmdgm‘w apare yajﬁam
yajﬁehaivopajuhvati

SYNONYMS

daivam—in worshiping the demigods; eva—like this; apare—some others;
yajﬁam—sacrifices; yogihah—mystics; paryupc‘tsate—worship perfectly;
brahma—of the Absolute Truth; aghau—in the fire; apare—others;
yajﬁam—sacrifice; yajﬁeha—by sacrifice; eva—thus; upajuhvati—offer.

TRANSLATION

Some yogis perfectly worship the demigods by offering different sacrifices to
them, and some of them offer sacrifices in the fire of the Supreme Brahman.

PURPORT

As described above, a person engaged in discharging duties in Krsna
consciousness is also called a perfect yogi or a first-class mystic. But there are
others also, who perform similar sacrifices in the worship of demigods, and still
others who sacrifice to the Supreme Brahman, or the impersonal feature of the
Supreme Lord. 80 there are different kinds of sacrifices in terms of different
categories. Such different categories of sacrifice by different types of
performers only superficially demark varieties of sacrifice. Factually sacrifice



means to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Visnu, who is also known as Yajﬁa. All the
different varieties of sacrifice can be placed within two primary divisions:
namely, sacrifice of worldly possessions and sacrifice in pursuit of
transcendental knowledge. Those who are in Krsna consciousness sacrifice all
material possessions for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord, while others,
who want some temporary material happiness, sacrifice their material
possessions to satisfy demigods such as Indra, the sun-god, etc. And others, who
are impersonalists, sacrifice their identity by merging into the existence of
impersonal Brahman. The demigods are powerful living entities appointed by
the Supreme Lord for the maintenance and supervision of all material
functions like the heating, watering and lighting of the universe. Those who
are interested in material benefits worship the demigods by various sacrifices
according to the Vedic rituals. They are called bahv-is’vam-vc‘tdi, or believers in
many gods. But others, who worship the impersonal feature of the Absolute
Truth and regard the forms of the demigods as temporary, sacrifice their
individual selves in the supreme fire and thus end their individual existences
by merging into the existence of the Supreme. Such impersonalists sacrifice
their time in philosophical speculation to understand the transcendental
nature of the Supreme. In other words, the fruitive workers sacrifice their
material possessions for material enjoyment, whereas the impersonalist
sacrifices his material designations with a View to merging into the existence
of the Supreme. For the impersonalist, the fire altar of sacrifice is the Supreme
Brahman, and the offering is the self being consumed by the fire of Brahman.
The Krsna conscious person, like Arjuna, however, sacrifices everything for
the satisfaction of Krsna, and thus all his material possessions as well as his
own self—everything—is sacrificed for Krsna. Thus, he is the first-class yogi;
but he does not lose his individual existence.

WWWWI
WWWEIEQIIWI



s’rotrc‘tdihihdriyc‘my ahye
samyamcighisu juhvati
s’abdadih visaycih ahya
ihdriyc‘tghisu juhvati

SYNONYMS

s’rotra—c‘tdihi—such as the hearing process; ihdriyc‘mi—senses; anye—others;
samyama—of restraint; agm'su—in the fires; juhvati—offer;
s’abda-c‘tdih—sound Vibration, etc., visayc'm—objects of sense gratification;
anye—others; ihdriya—of the sense organs; agm'su—in the fires; juhvati—they
sacrifice.

TRANSLATION

Some [the unadulterated brahmacaris] sacrifice the hearing process and the
senses in the fire of mental control, and others [the regulated householders]
sacrifice the objects of the senses in the fire of the senses.

PURPORT

The members of the four divisions of human life, namely the brahmacc‘wi,
the grhastha, the vc‘maprastha and the sahhyc‘tsi, are all meant to become perfect
yogis or transcendentalists. Since human life is not meant for our enjoying
sense gratification like the animals, the four orders of human life are so
arranged that one may become perfect in spiritual life. The brahmacc‘n‘is, or
students under the care of a bona fide spiritual master, control the mind by
abstaining from sense gratification. A brahmacc‘tri hears only words concerning
Krsna consciousness; hearing is the basic principle for understanding, and
therefore the pure brahmacc‘m engages fully in hater
hamahukirtaham—chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. He restrains
himself from the Vibrations of material sounds, and his hearing is engaged in
the transcendental sound Vibration of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna. Similarly, the
householders, who have some license for sense gratification, perform such acts



with great restraint. Sex life, intoxication and meat-eating are general
tendencies of human society, but a regulated householder does not indulge in
unrestricted sex life and other sense gratification. Marriage on the principles
of religious life is therefore current in all civilized human society because that
is the way for restricted sex life. This restricted, unattached sex life is also a
kind of yajﬁa because the restricted householder sacrifices his general
tendency toward sense gratification for higher, transcendental life.

TEXT 27

WWWWI
Wieﬁmﬁﬁuwu

sarvc‘mihdriya—karmc‘mi
prc‘ma—karmc‘mi cc‘tpare
citma—samyama—yogc‘tghau
juhvati jﬁc‘ma—dipite

SYNONYMS

sarvc‘mi—of all; ihdriya—the senses; karmahi—functions;
prc‘ma—karmc‘mi—functions of the life breath; ca—also; apare—others;
citma-samyama—of controlling the mind; yoga—the linking process;
aghau—in the fire of; juhvati—offer; jhc‘ma—dipite—because of the urge for
self-realization.

TRANSLATION

Others, Who are interested in achieving self-realization through control of
the mind and senses, offer the functions of all the senses, and of the life breath,
as oblations into the fire of the controlled mind.

PURPORT



The yoga system conceived by Pataﬁjali is referred to herein. In the
Yoga—siltm of Pataﬁjali, the soul is called pratyag—c‘ttmc‘t and parag-c‘ttmc‘t. As long
as the soul is attached to sense enjoyment it is called pardg-c‘ttmc‘t, but as soon as
the same soul becomes detached from such sense enjoyment it is called
pratyag-c'ttmc‘t. The soul is subjected to the functions of ten kinds of air at work
within the body, and this is perceived through the breathing system. The
Pataﬁjali system of yoga instructs one on how to control the functions of the
body’s air in a technical manner so that ultimately all the functions of the air
within become favorable for purifying the soul of material attachment.
According to this yoga system, pratyag-c‘ttmc‘t is the ultimate goal. This
pratyag-c'ttmc‘t is withdrawn from activities in matter. The senses interact with
the sense objects, like the ear for hearing, eyes for seeing, nose for smelling,
tongue for tasting, hand for touching, and all of them are thus engaged in
activities outside the self. They are called the functions of the prc‘ma-vc‘tyu. The
apcina-vc‘tyu goes downwards, vyc‘ma—vc‘tyu acts to shrink and expand,
samaha-vc‘tyu adjusts equilibrium, udc‘ma—vciyu goes upwards—and when one is
enlightened, one engages all these in searching for self-realization.

TEXT 28

WWWWI
Emma W: am: || Q= ||

dravya—yajhc‘ts tapo—yajﬁc‘t
yoga—yajﬁc‘ts tathc‘tpare

svc‘tdhyc‘tya—jﬁc‘ma—yajﬁc‘ts’ ca
yatayah sams’ita-watc‘th

SYNONYMS

dravya-yajﬁc'th—sacrificing one’s possessions; tapah-yajﬁc‘th—sacrifice in
austerities; yoga-yajﬁc‘th—sacrifice in eightfold mysticism; tathc'I—thus;
apare—others; svc‘tdhyc‘tya—sacrifice in the study of the Vedas;



jﬁc‘ma-yajﬁc‘th—sacrifice in advancement of transcendental knowledge;
ca—also; yatayah—enlightened persons; sams’ita—watc‘th—taken to strict vows.

TRANSLATION

Having accepted strict vows, some become enlightened by sacrificing their
possessions, and others by performing severe austerities, by practicing the yoga
of eightfold mysticism, or by studying the Vedas to advance in transcendental
knowledge.

PURPORT

These sacrifices may be fitted into various divisions. There are persons who
are sacrificing their possessions in the form of various kinds of charities. In
India, the rich mercantile community or princely orders open various kinds of
charitable institutions like dharma—s’c‘tld, anha-ksetra, atithi—s’c‘tlc‘t, cmathc‘tlaya
and Vidya-pitha. In other countries, too, there are many hospitals, old age
homes and similar charitable foundations meant for distributing food,
education and medical treatment free to the poor. All these charitable
activities are called dravyamaya—yajﬁa. There are others who, for higher
elevation in life or for promotion to higher planets within the universe,
voluntarily accept many kinds of austerities such as cahdrc'tyaha and
ccitmmc'tsya. These processes entail severe vows for conducting life under
certain rigid rules. For example, under the Catmmc'tsya vow the candidate does
not shave for four months during the year (July to October), he does not eat
certain foods, does not eat twice in a day or does not leave home. Such
sacrifice of the comforts of life is called tapomaya-yajﬁa. There are still others
who engage themselves in different kinds of mystic yogas like the Pataﬁjali
system (for merging into the existence of the Absolute), or hatha-yoga or
astc'mga-yoga (for particular perfections). And some travel to all the sanctified
places of pilgrimage. All these practices are called yoga-yajﬁa, sacrifice for a
certain type of perfection in the material world. There are others who engage
themselves in the studies of different Vedic literatures, specifically the
Upcmisads and Vedc‘mta—siltras, or the Sankhya philosophy. All of these are



called svc‘tdhyciya-yajﬁa. or engagement in the sacrifice of studies. All these
yogis are faithfully engaged in different types of sacrifice and are seeking a
higher status of life. Krsna consciousness, however, is different from these
because it is the direct service of the Supreme Lord. Krsna consciousness
cannot be attained by any one of the above-mentioned types of sacrifice but
can be attained only by the mercy of the Lord and His bona fide devotees.
Therefore, Krsna consciousness is transcendental.

TEXT 29

mﬁaeﬁwwsmaaﬁl
WW WW
anthem WWIIQIQII

apc‘me juhvati prc‘mam
prime ’pc‘mam tathc‘tpare
prdhapc‘ma—gati ruddhvc‘t
prahayama—parayahah
apare hiyatdhc‘m‘th
prahc‘m prc‘mesu juhvati

SYNONYMS

apc‘me—in the air which acts downward; juhvati—offer; prc‘mam—the air
which acts outward; prc‘me—in the air going outward; apc'mam—the air going
downward; tathc't—as also; apaTe—others; prc‘ma—of the air going outward;
apc'ma—and the air going downward; gati—the movement;
mddhvc‘t—checking; prc‘ma-c‘tyc‘tma—trance induced by stopping all breathing;
parc‘tyahc‘th—so inclined; apare—others; hiyata—having controlled;
aharah—eating; prc‘mc‘m—the outgoing air; prc‘mesu—in the outgoing air;
juhvati—sacrifice.

TRANSLATION



Still others, Who are inclined to the process of breath restraint to remain in
trance, practice by offering the movement of the outgoing breath into the
incoming, and the incoming breath into the outgoing, and thus at last remain in
trance, stopping all breathing. Others, curtailing the eating process, offer the
outgoing breath into itself as a sacrifice.

PURPORT

This system of yoga for controlling the breathing process is called
pranciycima, and in the beginning it is practiced in the hatha—yoga system
through different sitting postures. All of these processes are recommended for
controlling the senses and for advancement in spiritual realization. This
practice involves controlling the airs within the body so as to reverse the
directions of their passage. The apc'ma air goes downward, and the prc‘ma air
goes up. The prahayama-yogi practices breathing the opposite way until the
currents are neutralized into pﬁraka. equilibrium. Offering the exhaled breath
into the inhaled breath is called Tecaka. When both air currents are completely
stopped, one is said to be in kumbhaka-yoga. By practice of kumbhaka-yoga. one
can increase the duration of life for perfection in spiritual realization. The
intelligent yogi is interested in attaining perfection in one life, without waiting
for the next. For by practicing kumbhaka—yoga. the yogis increase the duration
of life by many, many years. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always
situated in the transcendental loving service of the Lord, automatically
becomes the controller of the senses. His senses, being always engaged in the
service of Krsna, have no chance of becoming otherwise engaged. So at the
end of life, he is naturally transferred to the transcendental plane of Lord
Krsna; consequently he makes no attempt to increase his longevity. He is at
once raised to the platform of liberation, as stated in Bbagavad—gité (14.26):

mm ca yo ’vyabhicc‘treha
bhakti-yogeha sevate
sa guhc‘m samatityaitcih
brahma—bhﬁyc‘tya kalpate



“One who engages in unalloyed devotional service to the Lord transcends
the modes of material nature and is immediately elevated to the spiritual
platform.” A Krsna conscious person begins from the transcendental stage, and
he is constantly in that consciousness. Therefore, there is no falling down, and
ultimately he enters into the abode of the Lord without delay. The practice of
reduced eating is automatically done when one eats only krsha-pmsadam, or
food which is offered first to the Lord. Reducing the eating process is very
helpful in the matter of sense control. And without sense control there is no
possibility of getting out of the material entanglement.

TEXT 30

aﬁsﬁﬁﬁﬁa’raﬁaﬁawmzl
Warheaammou

sarve ’py ete yajﬁa—vido

yajﬁa—ksapita—kalmasdh

yajha—s’istc‘tmrta—bhujo
yc‘mti brahma sahataham

SYNONYMS

sarve—all; api—although apparently different; ete—these;
yajﬁa-Uidah—conversant with the purpose of performing sacrifices;
yajﬁa-ksapita—being cleansed as the result of such performances;
kalmasc‘th—of sinful reactions; yajﬁa-s’ista—of the result of such performances
of yajﬁa; amrta—bhujah—those who have tasted such nectar; yc‘mti—do
approach; brahma—the supreme; sahc'ttcmam—eternal atmosphere.

TRANSLATION

All these performers Who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed of
sinful reactions, and, having tasted the nectar of the results of sacrifices, they



advance toward the supreme eternal atmosphere.

PURPORT

From the foregoing explanation of different types of sacrifice (namely
sacrifice of one’s possessions, study of the Vedas or philosophical doctrines, and
performance of the yoga system), it is found that the common aim of all is to
control the senses. Sense gratification is the root cause of material existence;
therefore, unless and until one is situated on a platform apart from sense
gratification, there is no chance of being elevated to the eternal platform of
full knowledge, full bliss and full life. This platform is in the eternal
atmosphere, or Brahman atmosphere. All the above-mentioned sacrifices help
one to become cleansed of the sinful reactions of material existence. By this
advancement in life, not only does one become happy and opulent in this life,
but also, at the end, he enters into the eternal kingdom of God, either merging
into the impersonal Brahman or associating with the Supreme Personality of

Godhead, Krsna.

TEXT 31

=rre1' WSW WW: W H 39 ||

miyam loko ’sty ayajﬁasya
kuto ’hyah kuru-sattama

SYNONYMS

ha—never; ayam—this; lokah—planet; asti—there is; ayajﬁasya—for one who
performs no sacrifice; kutah—where is; ahyah—the other; kum—sat—tama—O
best amongst the Kurus.

TRANSLATION

0 best of the Kuru dynasty, Without sacrifice one can never live happily on



this planet or in this life: What then of the next?

PURPORT

Whatever form of material existence one is in, one is invariably ignorant of
his real situation. In other words, existence in the material world is due to the
multiple reactions to our sinful lives. Ignorance is the cause of sinful life, and
sinful life is the cause of one’s dragging on in material existence. The human
form of life is the only loophole by which one may get out of this
entanglement. The Vedas, therefore, give us a chance for escape by pointing
out the paths of religion, economic comfort, regulated sense gratification and,
at last, the means to get out of the miserable condition entirely. The path of
religion, or the different kinds of sacrifice recommended above, automatically
solves our economic problems. By performance of yajﬁa we can have enough
food, enough milk, etc.—even if there is a so-called increase of population.
When the body is fully supplied, naturally the next stage is to satisfy the
senses. The Vedas prescribe, therefore, sacred marriage for regulated sense
gratification. Thereby one is gradually elevated to the platform of release from
material bondage, and the highest perfection of liberated life is to associate
with the Supreme Lord. Perfection is achieved by performance of yajﬁa
(sacrifice), as described above. Now, if a person is not inclined to perform
yajﬁa according to the Vedas, how can he expect a happy life even in this body,
and what to speak of another body on another planet? There are different
grades of material comforts in different heavenly planets, and in all cases there
is immense happiness for persons engaged in different kinds of yajﬁa. But the
highest kind of happiness that a man can achieve is to be promoted to the
spiritual planets by practice of Krsna consciousness. A life of Krsna
consciousness is therefore the solution to all the problems of material
existence.

TEXT 32
ﬁagﬁwwﬁamwﬁﬁlh



Wwﬁdwﬁﬁaﬁuaw

evam bahu—vidhc‘t yajﬁc‘t

Uitatc‘t brahmaho mukhe
karma—jc‘m viddhi tc‘m sarvc‘m

evam jﬁc‘ttvc‘t Uimoksyase

SYNONYMS

evam—thus; bahu—vidhc‘th—various kinds of; yajﬁc‘th—sacrifices; vitatc‘Ih—are
spread; brahmahah—of the Vedas; mukhe—through the mouth;
karma—jc‘m—born of work; viddhi—you should know; tc‘m—them; sarvc‘m—all;
evam—thus; jﬁc‘ttvc‘I—knowing; vimoksyase—you will be liberated.

TRANSLATION

All these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas, and all of
them are born of different types of work. Knowing them as such, you Will
become liberated.

PURPORT

Different types of sacrifice, as discussed above, are mentioned in the Vedas
to suit the different types of worker. Because men are so deeply absorbed in the
bodily concept, these sacrifices are so arranged that one can work either with
the body, with the mind, or with the intelligence. But all of them are
recommended for ultimately bringing about liberation from the body. This is
confirmed by the Lord herewith from His own mouth.

TEXT 33

Wzmm
asiWﬁaésmé’iaﬁqﬁanmﬁuasu



s’reyc‘m dravya—mayc‘td yajﬁcij
jﬁc‘ma-yajﬁah parahtapa
sarvam karmakhilam pc‘wtha
jﬁc‘me parisamcipyate

SYNONYMS

s’reyc‘m—greater; dravya—maydt—of material possessions; yajﬁc‘tt—than the
sacrifice; jﬁc‘ma—yajﬁah—sacrifice in knowledge; parcmtapa—O chastiser of the
enemy; sarvam—all; karma—activities; akhilam—in totality; pc‘wtha—O son of
Prtha; jhc‘me—in knowledge; parisamc‘tpyate—end.

TRANSLATION

O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice performed in knowledge is better than
the mere sacrifice of material possessions. After all, 0 son of Prtha, all sacrifices
of work culminate in transcendental knowledge.

PURPORT

The purpose of all sacrifices is to arrive at the status of complete knowledge,
then to gain release from material miseries, and, ultimately, to engage in loving
transcendental service to the Supreme Lord (Krsna consciousness).
Nonetheless, there is a mystery about all these different activities of sacrifice,
and one should know this mystery. Sacrifices sometimes take different forms
according to the particular faith of the performer. When one’s faith reaches
the stage of transcendental knowledge, the performer of sacrifices should be
considered more advanced than those who simply sacrifice material possessions
without such knowledge, for without attainment of knowledge, sacrifices
remain on the material platform and bestow no spiritual benefit. Real
knowledge culminates in Krsna consciousness, the highest stage of
transcendental knowledge. Without the elevation of knowledge, sacrifices are
simply material activities. When, however, they are elevated to the level of
transcendental knowledge, all such activities enter onto the spiritual platform.



Depending on differences in consciousness, sacrificial activities are sometimes
called karma—kc‘mda (fruitive activities) and sometimes jﬁc‘ma—kc‘mda
(knowledge in the pursuit of truth). It is better when the end is knowledge.

TEXT 34

mmwpiﬁﬁaml
Sﬁmﬁwﬁeﬁmﬁﬁar—oﬁﬁiﬁzuazu

"tad viddhi prahipc‘tteha
paripras’heha sevayc‘t
upadeksyahti te jﬁc‘mam
jﬁc‘mihas tattva-dars’ihah

SYNONYMS

tat—that knowledge of different sacrifices; Uiddhi—try to understand;
prahipc‘tteha—by approaching a spiritual master; paripras’heha—by submissive
inquiries; sevayc‘t—by the rendering of service; upadeksyahti—they will
initiate; te—you; jﬁc‘mam—into knowledge; jﬁc‘mihah—the self-realized;
tattva—of the truth; dars’ihah—seers.

TRANSLATION

Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from
him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized souls can
impart knowledge unto you because they have seen the truth.

PURPORT

The path of spiritual realization is undoubtedly difficult. The Lord
therefore advises us to approach a bona fide spiritual master in the line of
disciplic succession from the Lord Himself. No one can be a bona fide spiritual
master without following this principle of disciplic succession. The Lord is the



original spiritual master, and a person in the disciplic succession can convey
the message of the Lord as it is to his disciple. No one can be spiritually
realized by manufacturing his own process, as is the fashion of the foolish
pretenders. The Bhagavatam (6.3.19) says, dharmam tu saksc‘td
bhagavat—prahitam: the path of religion is directly enunciated by the Lord.
Therefore, mental speculation or dry arguments cannot help lead one to the
right path. Nor by independent study of books of knowledge can one progress
in spiritual life. One has to approach a bona fide spiritual master to receive the
knowledge. Such a spiritual master should be accepted in full surrender, and
one should serve the spiritual master like a menial servant, without false
prestige. Satisfaction of the self-realized spiritual master is the secret of
advancement in spiritual life. Inquiries and submission constitute the proper
combination for spiritual understanding. Unless there is submission and
service, inquiries from the learned spiritual master will not be effective. One
must be able to pass the test of the spiritual master, and when he sees the
genuine desire of the disciple, he automatically blesses the disciple with
genuine spiritual understanding. In this verse, both blind following and absurd
inquiries are condemned. Not only should one hear submissively from the
spiritual master, but one must also get a clear understanding from him, in
submission and service and inquiries. A bona fide spiritual master is by nature
very kind toward the disciple. Therefore when the student is submissive and is
always ready to render service, the reciprocation of knowledge and inquiries
becomes perfect.

TEXT 35

maragaﬁizﬁaiwﬁrqweal
ﬁﬁiﬁlﬂﬁﬁtﬁiammaﬁtﬁuaau

yaj jﬁc‘ttvc‘t ha puhar moham
evam yc‘tsyasi pandava
yeha thZtc‘my as’esc‘mi

draksyasy citmcmy atho mayi



SYNONYMS

yat—which; jﬁc‘ttvc‘I—knowing; ha—never; puhah—again; moham—to illusion;
evam—like this; yc‘tsyasi—you shall go; pandava—O son of Pandu; yeha—by
which; thZtc‘mi—living entities; as’esc‘mi—all; draksyasi—you will see;
citmcmi—in the Supreme Soul; atha u—or in other words; mayi—in Me.

TRANSLATION

Having obtained real knowledge from a self-realized soul, you Will never fall
again into such illusion, for by this knowledge you Will see that all living beings
are but part of the Supreme, or, in other words, that they are Mine.

PURPORT

The result of receiving knowledge from a self-realized soul, or one who
knows things as they are, is learning that all living beings are parts and parcels
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna. The sense of an
existence separate from Krsna is called mciyc't (mci—not, yc‘t—this). Some think
that we have nothing to do with Krsna, that Krsna is only a great historical
personality and that the Absolute is the impersonal Brahman. Factually, as it is
stated in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, this impersonal Brahman is the personal
effulgence of Krsna. Krsna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the
cause of everything. In the Bmhma-samhita it is clearly stated that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. Even the millions of
incarnations are only His different expansions. Similarly, the living entities
are also expansions of Krsna. The Mayavadi philosophers wrongly think that
Krsna loses His own separate existence in His many expansions. This thought
is material in nature. We have experience in the material world that a thing,
when fragmentally distributed, loses its own original identity. But the
Mayavadi philosophers fail to understand that absolute means that one plus
one is equal to one, and that one minus one is also equal to one. This is the
case in the absolute world.



For want of sufficient knowledge in the absolute science, we are now
covered with illusion, and therefore we think that we are separate from Krsna.
Although we are separated parts of Krsna, we are nevertheless not different
from Him. The bodily difference of the living entities is mciyc't, or not actual
fact. We are all meant to satisfy Krsna. By mciyc't alone Arjuna thought that the
temporary bodily relationship with his kinsmen was more important than his
eternal spiritual relationship with Krsna. The whole teaching of the Gitc't is
targeted toward this end: that a living being, as Krsna’s eternal servitor,
cannot be separated from Krsna, and his sense of being an identity apart from
Krsna is called mciyc't. The living entities, as separate parts and parcels of the
Supreme, have a purpose to fulfill. Having forgotten that purpose since time
immemorial, they are situated in different bodies, as men, animals, demigods,
etc. Such bodily differences arise from forgetfulness of the transcendental
service of the Lord. But when one is engaged in transcendental service
through Krsna consciousness, one becomes at once liberated from this illusion.
One can acquire such pure knowledge only from the bona fide spiritual master
and thereby avoid the delusion that the living entity is equal to Krsna. Perfect
knowledge is that the Supreme Soul, Krsna, is the supreme shelter for all living
entities, and giving up such shelter, the living entities are deluded by the
material energy, imagining themselves to have a separate identity. Thus, under
different standards of material identity, they become forgetful of Krsna.
When, however, such deluded living entities become situated in Krsna
consciousness, it is to be understood that they are on the path of liberation, as
confirmed in the Bhagavatam (2.10.6): muktir hitvc‘myathc‘t—mpam svarﬁpeha
vyavasthitih. Liberation means to be situated in one’s constitutional position as
an eternal servitor of Krsna (Krsna consciousness).

TEXT 36

3189213898121szsz
Haima—éﬂaqﬁlﬁar—crﬁwﬁrusau

api ced asi papebhyah



sarvebhyah papa-th—tamah
sarvam jﬁc‘ma—plavehaiva
vrjiham santarisyasi

SYNONYMS

api—even; cet—if; asi—you are; papebhyah—of sinners; sarvebhyah—of all;
papa—th-tamah—the greatest sinner; sarvam—all such sinful reactions;
jﬁc‘ma-plaveha—by the boat of transcendental knowledge; eva—certainly;
vrjiham—the ocean of miseries; santarisyasi—you will cross completely.

TRANSLATION

Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, When you are
situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge you Will be able to cross over
the ocean of miseries.

PURPORT

Proper understanding of one’s constitutional position in relationship to
Krsna is so nice that it can at once lift one from the struggle for existence
which goes on in the ocean of nescience. This material world is sometimes
regarded as an ocean of nescience and sometimes as a blazing forest. In the
ocean, however expert a swimmer one may be, the struggle for existence is very
severe. If someone comes forward and lifts the struggling swimmer from the
ocean, he is the greatest savior. Perfect knowledge, received from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is the path of liberation. The boat of Krsna
consciousness is very simple, but at the same time the most sublime.

TEXT 37

me WSWSQH I
EIFITﬁi: WWW" 3x9 ||



yathaidhcimsi samiddho ’gm'r
bhasma-sdt kmute ’rjuha
jﬁc‘mc‘tghih sarva-karmc‘mi
bhasma-sdt kmute tathd

SYNONYMS

yathc‘I—just as; edhc‘m’tsi—firewood; samiddhah—blazing; agm'h—fire;
bhasma—sc‘tt—ashes; kmute—turns; arjuha—O Arjuna; jﬁc‘ma—aghih—the fire
of knowledge; sarva-karmc‘mi—all reactions to material activities;
bhasma—sc‘tt—to ashes; kumte—it turns; tathc‘I—similarly.

TRANSLATION

As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire of
knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.

PURPORT

Perfect knowledge of self and Superself and of their relationship is
compared herein to fire. This fire not only burns up all reactions to impious
activities, but also all reactions to pious activities, turning them to ashes.
There are many stages of reaction: reaction in the making, reaction
fructifying, reaction already achieved, and reaction a priori. But knowledge of
the constitutional position of the living entity burns everything to ashes.
When one is in complete knowledge, all reactions, both a priori and a
posteriori, are consumed. In the Vedas (Brbad—éranyaka Upam'saa 4.4.22) it is
stated, ubhe uhaivaisa ete taraty amrtah sath—asc‘tdhﬁhi: “One overcomes both
the pious and impious reactions of work.”

TEXT 38

ﬁﬁaﬁqmqﬁaﬁeﬁaﬁl



WW:W§WII3=II

ha hi jhc‘meha sadrs’am
pavitram iha vidyate
tat svayam yoga—samsiddhah
kalehc‘ttmahi vihdati

SYNONYMS

ha—nothing; hi—certainly; jﬁc‘meha—with knowledge; sadrs’am—in
comparison; pavitram—sanctified; iha—in this world; vidyate—exists;
tat—that; svayam—himself; yoga—in devotion; samsiddhah—he who is
mature; kaleha—in course of time; citmcmi—in himself; Uihdati—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

In this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental
knowledge. Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And one Who
has become accomplished in the practice of devotional service enjoys this
knowledge Within himself in due course of time.

PURPORT

When we speak of transcendental knowledge, we do so in terms of spiritual
understanding. As such, there is nothing so sublime and pure as
transcendental knowledge. Ignorance is the cause of our bondage, and
knowledge is the cause of our liberation. This knowledge is the mature fruit of
devotional service, and when one is situated in transcendental knowledge, he
need not search for peace elsewhere, for he enjoys peace within himself. In
other words, this knowledge and peace culminate in Krsna consciousness. That
is the last word in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

TEXT 39



Wahwwﬁﬁml
WWWWIWQII

s’raddhc‘wc‘tl labhate jﬁc‘mam
tat—parah samyatehdriyah
jﬁc‘mam labdhvc‘t parc‘tm s’c‘mtim
acirehadhigacchati

SYNONYMS

s’raddhc‘t—vc‘m—a faithful man; labhate—achieves; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
tat—parah—very much attached to it; samyata—controlled; ihdriyah—senses;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; labdhvc‘t—having achieved; param—transcendental;
s’c‘mtim—peace; acireha—Very soon; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

A faithful man Who is dedicated to transcendental knowledge and Who
subdues his senses is eligible to achieve such knowledge, and having achieved it
he quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace.

PURPORT

Such knowledge in Krsna consciousness can be achieved by a faithful
person who believes firmly in Krsna. One is called a faithful man who thinks
that simply by acting in Krsna consciousness he can attain the highest
perfection. This faith is attained by the discharge of devotional service, and by
chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, which cleanses one’s heart of all material dirt.
Over and above this, one should control the senses. A person who is faithful to
Krsna and who controls the senses can easily attain perfection in the
knowledge of Krsna consciousness without delay.

TEXT 40



aema'etwaammﬁmﬁn
mail@stieqqﬁﬁaﬁaﬁmmﬁzueou

ajﬁas’ cc‘ts’raddadhc‘mas’ ca
sams’ayc‘ttmc‘t vihas’yati
hayam loko ’sti ha paro
ha sukham sams’ayc‘ttmahah

SYNONYMS

ajﬁah—a fool who has no knowledge in standard scriptures; ca—and;
as’raddadhc‘mah—without faith in revealed scriptures; ca—also; sams’aya—of
doubts; citmc‘t—a person; vihas’yati—falls back; ha—never; ayam—in this;
lokah—world; asti—there is; ha—nor; parah—in the next life; ha—not;
sukham—happiness; sams’aya—doubtful; citmahah—of the person.

TRANSLATION

But ignorant and faithless persons Who doubt the revealed scriptures do not
attain God consciousness; they fall down. For the doubting soul there is
happiness neither in this world nor in the next.

PURPORT

Out of many standard and authoritative revealed scriptures, the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t is the best. Persons who are almost like animals have no faith in,
or knowledge of, the standard revealed scriptures; and some, even though they
have knowledge of, or can cite passages from, the revealed scriptures, have
actually no faith in these words. And even though others may have faith in
scriptures like Bhagavad-gitc‘t, they do not believe in or worship the Personality
of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Such persons cannot have any standing in Krsna
consciousness. They fall down. Out of all the above-mentioned persons, those
who have no faith and are always doubtful make no progress at all. Men



without faith in God and His revealed word find no good in this world, nor in
the next. For them there is no happiness whatsoever. One should therefore
follow the principles of revealed scriptures with faith and thereby be raised to
the platform of knowledge. Only this knowledge will help one become
promoted to the transcendental platform of spiritual understanding. In other
words, doubtful persons have no status whatsoever in spiritual emancipation.
One should therefore follow in the footsteps of great cicc'tryas who are in the
disciplic succession and thereby attain success.

TEXT 41

WWI
WHWWWIIMII

yoga—sannyasta—karmc‘mam

jﬁc‘ma—saﬁchihha—sams’ayam
citmavahtam ha karmahi
hibadhhahti dhahaﬁjaya

SYNONYMS

yoga—by devotional service in karma—yoga; sannyasta—one who has
renounced; karmc‘mam—the fruits of actions; jﬁc‘ma—by knowledge;
saﬁchihha—cut; sams’ayam—doubts; citma—vahtam—situated in the self;
ha—never; karmahi—works; hibadhhahti—do bind; dhahaﬁjaya—O
conqueror of riches.

TRANSLATION

One Who acts in devotional service, renouncing the fruits of his actions, and
Whose doubts have been destroyed by transcendental knowledge, is situated
factually in the self. Thus he is not bound by the reactions of work, 0
conqueror of riches.



PURPORT

One who follows the instruction of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, as it is imparted by
the Lord, the Personality of Godhead Himself, becomes free from all doubts by
the grace of transcendental knowledge. He, as a part and parcel of the Lord, in
full Krsna consciousness, is already established in self-knowledge. As such, he
is undoubtedly above bondage to action.

TEXT 42
WWWH
ﬁﬁméﬁwﬁlﬁiﬁemuequ

tasmc‘td ajﬁc‘ma-sambhﬁtam
hTt-stham jﬁdm‘tsim‘ttmahah
chittvaiham sams’ayam yogam
citisthottistha bhc‘wata

SYNONYMS

tasmc‘It—therefore; ajﬁc‘ma—sambhﬁtam—born of ignorance;
hTt-stham—situated in the heart; jﬁc‘ma—of knowledge; asim‘t—by the weapon;
citmahah—of the self; chittvc‘t—cutting off; enam—this; sams’ayam—doubt;
yogam—in yoga; citistha—be situated; uttistha—stand up to fight; bhc‘wata—O
descendant of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Therefore the doubts Which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance
should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed With yoga, O Bharata,
stand and fight.

PURPORT



The yoga system instructed in this chapter is called sahataha—yoga, or
eternal activities performed by the living entity. This yoga has two divisions of
sacrificial actions: one is called sacrifice of one’s material possessions, and the
other is called knowledge of self, which is pure spiritual activity. If sacrifice of
one’s material possessions is not dovetailed for spiritual realization, then such
sacrifice becomes material. But one who performs such sacrifices with a
spiritual objective, or in devotional service, makes a perfect sacrifice. When we
come to spiritual activities, we find that these are also divided into two:
namely, understanding of one’s own self (or one’s constitutional position), and
the truth regarding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who follows the
path of Bhagavad-gitc‘t as it is can very easily understand these two important
divisions of spiritual knowledge. For him there is no difficulty in obtaining
perfect knowledge of the self as part and parcel of the Lord. And such
understanding is beneficial, for such a person can easily understand the
transcendental activities of the Lord. In the beginning of this chapter, the
transcendental activities of the Lord were discussed by the Supreme Lord
Himself. One who does not understand the instructions of the Gitc't is faithless,
and is to be considered to be misusing the fragmental independence awarded
to him by the Lord. In spite of such instructions, one who does not understand
the real nature of the Lord as the eternal, blissful, all-knowing Personality of
Godhead is certainly fool number one. Ignorance can be removed by gradual
acceptance of the principles of Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is
awakened by different types of sacrifices to the demigods, sacrifice to
Brahman, sacrifice in celibacy, in household life, in controlling the senses, in
practicing mystic yoga, in penance, in forgoing material possessions, in
studying the Vedas, and in partaking of the social institution called
vamc‘ts’rama—dharma. All of these are known as sacrifice, and all of them are
based on regulated action. But within all these activities, the important factor
is self-realization. One who seeks that objective is the real student of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t, but one who doubts the authority of Krsna falls back. One is
therefore advised to study Bhagavad-gitc‘t, or any other scripture, under a bona
fide spiritual master, with service and surrender. A bona fide spiritual master is
in the disciplic succession from time eternal, and he does not deviate at all



from the instructions of the Supreme Lord as they were imparted millions of
years ago to the sun-god, from whom the instructions of Bhagavad-gitc‘t have
come down to the earthly kingdom. One should, therefore, follow the path of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t as it is expressed in the Gitc't itself and beware of self-interested
people after personal aggrandizement who deviate others from the actual path.
The Lord is definitely the supreme person, and His activities are
transcendental. One who understands this is a liberated person from the very
beginning of his study of Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

Thus end the Bhaktivedahta Purports to the F ourth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Transcendental Knowledge.

Karma-yoga—Action in Krsna Consciousness

 

TEXT 1

W331?
WWwWaﬁﬁH
WWaﬁqﬁgﬁmmu

arjuha uvc‘tca
sannyc‘tsam karmahc‘tm krsha
puhar yogam ca s’amsasi
yac chreya etayor ekam
tcm me bmhi su—m's’citam



SYNONYMS

arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; sannyc‘tsam—renunciation; karmahc‘tm—of all
activities; krsha—O Krsna; puhah—again; yogam—devotional service;
ca—also; s’amsasi—You are praising; yat—which; s’reyah—is more beneficial;
etayoh—of these two; ekam—one; tat—that; me—unto me; brIZhi—please tell;
su—his’citam—definitely.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Krsna, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and then
again You recommend work With devotion. Now Will You kindly tell me
definitely Which of the two is more beneficial?

PURPORT

In this Fifth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the Lord says that work in
devotional service is better than dry mental speculation. Devotional service is
easier than the latter because, being transcendental in nature, it frees one
from reaction. In the Second Chapter, preliminary knowledge of the soul and
its entanglement in the material body were explained. How to get out of this
material encagement by buddhi-yoga, or devotional service, was also explained
therein. In the Third Chapter, it was explained that a person who is situated
on the platform of knowledge no longer has any duties to perform. And in the
Fourth Chapter the Lord told Arjuna that all kinds of sacrificial work
culminate in knowledge. However, at the end of the Fourth Chapter, the Lord
advised Arjuna to wake up and fight, being situated in perfect knowledge.
Therefore, by simultaneously stressing the importance of both work in
devotion and inaction in knowledge, Krsna has perplexed Arjuna and
confused his determination. Arjuna understands that renunciation in
knowledge involves cessation of all kinds of work performed as sense activities.
But if one performs work in devotional service, then how is work stopped.7 In
other words, he thinks that sannyc‘tsa, or renunciation in knowledge, should be



altogether free from all kinds of activity, because work and renunciation
appear to him to be incompatible. He appears not to have understood that
work in full knowledge is nonreactive and is therefore the same as inaction.
He inquires, therefore, whether he should cease work altogether or work with
full knowledge.

TEXT 2

W
W=Wﬂﬁtmﬁl
WWWIIQII

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
sannyc‘tsah karma-yogas’ ca
hihs’reyasa—karc‘w ubhau
tayos tu karma—sannyc‘tsc‘tt
karma—yogo vis’isyate

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Personality of Godhead said;
sahhyc‘tsah—renunciation of work; karma—yogah—work in devotion; ca—also;
hihs’reyasa—karau—leading to the path of liberation; ubhau—both; tayoh—of
the two; tu—but; karma-sahhyc‘tscit—in comparison to the renunciation of
fruitive work; karma—yogah—work in devotion; vis’isyate—is better.

TRANSLATION

The Personality of Godhead replied: The renunciation of work and work in
devotion are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotional
service is better than renunciation of work.

PURPORT



Fruitive activities (seeking sense gratification) are cause for material
bondage. As long as one is engaged in activities aimed at improving the
standard of bodily comfort, one is sure to transmigrate to different types of
bodies, thereby continuing material bondage perpetually. grimad-Bbégavatam

(5.5.4—6) confirms this as follows:

haham pramattah kmute vikarma
yad ihdriya-pritaya ciprhoti
ha sadhu manye yata citmcmo ’yam
ascmh api kles’a—da Elsa dehah

parabhavas tc‘wad abodha—jc‘tto
yc‘wcm ha jijﬁdsata citma—tattvam
yc‘wat kriyc‘ts tc‘wad idam memo vai
karmdtmakam yeha s’arira—bahdhah

evam mahah karma-vas’am prayuhkte
avidyayc‘ttmahy upadhiyamc‘me
pritir ha yc‘wcm mayi vc‘tsudeve
ha mucyate deha—yogeha tc‘wat

“People are mad after sense gratification, and they do not know that this
present body, which is full of miseries, is a result of one’s fruitive activities in
the past. Although this body is temporary, it is always giving one trouble in
many ways. Therefore, to act for sense gratification is not good. One is
considered to be a failure in life as long as he makes no inquiry about his real
identity. As long as he does not know his real identity, he has to work for
fruitive results for sense gratification, and as long as one is engrossed in the
consciousness of sense gratification one has to transmigrate from one body to
another. Although the mind may be engrossed in fruitive activities and
influenced by ignorance, one must develop a love for devotional service to
Vasudeva. Only then can one have the opportunity to get out of the bondage
of material existence.”

Therefore, jﬁc‘ma (or knowledge that one is not this material body but spirit
soul) is not sufficient for liberation. One has to act in the status of spirit soul,



otherwise there is no escape from material bondage. Action in Krsna
consciousness is not, however, action on the fruitive platform. Activities
performed in full knowledge strengthen one’s advancement in real knowledge.
Without Krsna consciousness, mere renunciation of fruitive activities does not
actually purify the heart of a conditioned soul. As long as the heart is not
purified, one has to work on the fruitive platform. But action in Krsna
consciousness automatically helps one escape the result of fruitive action so
that one need not descend to the material platform. Therefore action in Krsna
consciousness is always superior to renunciation, which always entails a risk of
falling. Renunciation without Krsna consciousness is incomplete, as is
confirmed by Srila Rfipa Gosvami in his Bbakti—rasﬁmrta-smdbu (1.2.258):

prc‘tpaﬁcikatayc‘t buddhyc‘t
hari—sambahdhi—vastuhah

mumuksubhih parityc‘tgo
vairc‘tgyam phalgu kathyate

“When persons eager to achieve liberation renounce things related to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, thinking them to be material, their
renunciation is called incomplete.” Renunciation is complete when it is in the
knowledge that everything in existence belongs to the Lord and that no one
should claim proprietorship over anything. One should understand that,
factually, nothing belongs to anyone. Then where is the question of
renunciation.7 One who knows that everything is Krsna’s property is always
situated in renunciation. Since everything belongs to Krsna, everything should
be employed in the service of Krsna. This perfect form of action in Krsna
consciousness is far better than any amount of artificial renunciation by a
scmnyc‘tsi of the Mayavadi school.

TEXT 3

awaﬁaaam‘itiiﬁaféﬁmgﬁrl
ﬁﬁﬁmaﬁmusu



jﬁeyah sa hitya-sahhyc‘tsi

yo ha dvesti ha kahksati

hirdvcmdvo hi mahc‘I-bc‘tho
sukham bahdhc‘tt pramucyate

SYNONYMS

jﬁeyah—should be known; sah—he; m'tya—always; sannyc‘tsi—renouncer;
yah—who; ha—never; dvesti—abhors; ha—nor; kahksati—desires;
hirdvahdvah—free from all dualities; hi—certainly; mahc‘I-bc‘tho—O
mighty-armed one; sukham—happily; bahdhc‘tt—from bondage; pramucyate—is
completely liberated.

TRANSLATION

One Who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known to be
always renounced. Such a person, free from all dualities, easily overcomes
material bondage and is completely liberated, O mighty-armed Arjuna.

PURPORT

One who is fully in Krsna consciousness is always a renouncer because he
feels neither hatred nor desire for the results of his actions. Such a renouncer,
dedicated to the transcendental loving service of the Lord, is fully qualified in
knowledge because he knows his constitutional position in his relationship
with Krsna. He knows fully well that Krsna is the whole and that he is part and
parcel of Krsna. Such knowledge is perfect because it is qualitatively and
quantitatively correct. The concept of oneness with Krsna is incorrect because
the part cannot be equal to the whole. Knowledge that one is one in quality
yet different in quantity is correct transcendental knowledge leading one to
become full in himself, having nothing to aspire to or lament over. There is no
duality in his mind because whatever he does, he does for Krsna. Being thus
freed from the platform of dualities, he is liberated—even in this material
world.



TEXT 4

WQW2W=IW2I
Wzmﬁﬁaﬁmueu

scihkhya—yogau prthag balah
pravadahti ha pahditc‘th
ekam apy asthitah samyag
ubhayor Uihdate phalam

SYNONYMS

scihkhya—analytical study of the material world; yogau—work in devotional
service; prthak—different; balah—the less intelligent; pravadahti—say;
ha—never; pahditc‘th—the learned; ekam—in one; api—even; asthitah—being
situated; samyak—complete; ubhayoh—of both; vihdate—enjoys; phalam—the
result.

TRANSLATION

Only the ignorant speak of devotional service [karma-yoga] as being different
from the analytical study of the material world [Sankhya]. Those Who are
actually learned say that he Who applies himself well to one of these paths
achieves the results of both.

PURPORT

The aim of the analytical study of the material world is to find the soul of
existence. The soul of the material world is Visnu, or the Supersoul.
Devotional service to the Lord entails service to the Supersoul. One process is
to find the root of the tree, and the other is to water the root. The real student
of Sankhya philosophy finds the root of the material world, Visnu, and then,
in perfect knowledge, engages himself in the service of the Lord. Therefore, in



essence, there is no difference between the two because the aim of both is
Visnu. Those who do not know the ultimate end say that the purposes of
Sankhya and karma-yoga are not the same, but one who is learned knows the
unifying aim in these different processes.

TEXT 5

Wzmcqﬁwﬁaﬁiﬁtﬁml
wmaﬁiﬁaazwﬁmwﬁuau

yat scihkhyaih prdpyate sthc‘mam
tad yogair api gamyate
ekam scihkhyam ca yogam ca
yah pas’yati sa pas’yati

SYNONYMS

yat—what; sdhkhyaih—by means of Sankhya philosophy; prc‘tpyate—is
achieved; sthc'mam—place; tat—that; yogaih—by devotional service; api—also;
gamyate—one can attain; ekam—one; scihkhyam—analytical study; ca—and;
yogam—action in devotion; ca—and; yah—one who; pas’yati—sees; sah—he;
pas’yati—actually sees.

TRANSLATION

One Who knows that the position reached by means of analytical study can
also be attained by devotional service, and Who therefore sees analytical study
and devotional service to be on the same level, sees things as they are.

PURPORT

The real purpose of philosophical research is to find the ultimate goal of
life. Since the ultimate goal of life is self-realization, there is no difference
between the conclusions reached by the two processes. By Sankhya



philosophical research one comes to the conclusion that a living entity is not a
part and parcel of the material world but of the supreme spirit whole.
Consequently, the spirit soul has nothing to do with the material world; his
actions must be in some relation with the Supreme. When he acts in Krsna
consciousness, he is actually in his constitutional position. In the first process,
Sankhya, one has to become detached from matter, and in the devotional yoga
process one has to attach himself to the work of Krsna consciousness.
Factually, both processes are the same, although superficially one process
appears to involve detachment and the other process appears to involve
attachment. Detachment from matter and attachment to Krsna are one and
the same. One who can see this sees things as they are.

TEXT 6

mWQWWI
WWWMII

scmnycisas tu mahc‘I-bc‘tho

duhkham ciptum ayogatah

yoga—yukto muhir brahma
ha cirehadhigacchati

SYNONYMS

sannyc‘tsah—the renounced order of life; tu—but; mahc‘t-bc‘tho—O
mighty-armed one; duhkham—distress; ciptum—afﬂicts one with;
ayogatah—without devotional service; yoga—yuktah—one engaged in
devotional service; muhih—a thinker; brahma—the Supreme; ha
cireha—without delay; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

Merely renouncing all activities yet not engaging in the devotional service of
the Lord cannot make one happy. But a thoughtful person engaged in devotional



service can achieve the Supreme Without delay.

PURPORT

There are two classes of sannyc‘tsis, or persons in the renounced order of life.
The Mayavadi scmnyc'tsis are engaged in the study of Sankhya philosophy,
whereas the Vaisnava scmnycisis are engaged in the study of Bhagavatam
philosophy, which affords the proper commentary on the Vedc'mta-sﬁtms. The
Mayavadi sannyc‘tsis also study the Vedanta—sﬁtras, but use their own
commentary, called Sariraka-bhasya, written by Sankaracarya. The students of
the Bhagavata school are engaged in the devotional service of the Lord,
according to paﬁcaratriki regulations, and therefore the Vaisnava scmnyc'tsis
have multiple engagements in the transcendental service of the Lord. The
Vaisnava scmnyc'tsis have nothing to do with material activities, and yet they
perform various activities in their devotional service to the Lord. But the
Mayavadi sannyc‘tsis, engaged in the studies of Sankhya and Vedanta and
speculation, cannot relish the transcendental service of the Lord. Because
their studies become very tedious, they sometimes become tired of Brahman
speculation, and thus they take shelter of the Bhagavatam without proper
understanding. Consequently their study of the Srimad-Bhagavatam becomes
troublesome. Dry speculations and impersonal interpretations by artificial
means are all useless for the Mayavadi sannyc‘tsis. The Vaisnava scmnyc‘tsis, who
are engaged in devotional service, are happy in the discharge of their
transcendental duties, and they have the guarantee of ultimate entrance into
the kingdom of God. The Mayavadi sannyc‘tsis sometimes fall down from the
path of self-realization and again enter into material activities of a
philanthropic and altruistic nature, which are nothing but material
engagements. Therefore, the conclusion is that those who are engaged in
Krsna conscious activities are better situated than the scmnyc'tsis engaged in
simple speculation about what is Brahman and what is not Brahman, although
they too come to Krsna consciousness, after many births.

TEXT 7



Wﬁwmﬁﬁﬁﬁu
WWHWIWII

yoga—yukto Uis’uddhc‘ttmc‘t
vijitc‘ttmc‘t jitehdriyah
sarva—bhﬁtc‘ttma-bhﬁtc‘ttmc‘t
kmvahh api ha lipyate

SYNONYMS

yoga—yuktah—engaged in devotional service; vis’uddha—c‘ttmc‘t—a purified soul;
Uijita-c'ttmc‘t—self-controlled; jita-ihdriyah—having conquered the senses;
sarva—bhﬁta—to all living entities; citma—thZta—c‘ttmc‘t—compassionate; kmvcm
api—although engaged in work; ha—never; lipyate—is entangled.

TRANSLATION

One Who works in devotion, Who is a pure soul, and Who controls his mind
and senses is clear to everyone, and everyone is clear to him. Though always
working, such a man is never entangled.

PURPORT

One who is on the path of liberation by Krsna consciousness is very dear to
every living being, and every living being is dear to him. This is due to his
Krsna consciousness. Such a person cannot think of any living being as
separate from Krsna, just as the leaves and branches of a tree are not separate
from the tree. He knows very well that by pouring water on the root of the
tree, the water will be distributed to all the leaves and branches, or by
supplying food to the stomach, the energy is automatically distributed
throughout the body. Because one who works in Krsna consciousness is servant
to all, he is very dear to everyone. And because everyone is satisfied by his
work, he is pure in consciousness. Because he is pure in consciousness, his



mind is completely controlled. And because his mind is controlled, his senses
are also controlled. Because his mind is always fixed on Krsna, there is no
chance of his being deviated from Krsna. Nor is there a chance that he will
engage his senses in matters other than the service of the Lord. He does not
like to hear anything except topics relating to Krsna; he does not like to eat
anything which is not offered to Krsna; and he does not wish to go anywhere if
Krsna is not involved. Therefore, his senses are controlled. A man of
controlled senses cannot be offensive to anyone. One may ask, “Why then was
Arjuna offensive (in battle) to others? Wasn’t he in Krsna consciousness?”
Arjuna was only superficially offensive because (as has already been explained
in the Second Chapter) all the assembled persons on the battlefield would
continue to live individually, as the soul cannot be slain. So, spiritually, no one
was killed on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra. Only their dresses were changed by
the order of Krsna, who was personally present. Therefore Arjuna, while
fighting on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, was not really fighting at all; he was
simply carrying out the orders of Krsna in full Krsna consciousness. Such a
person is never entangled in the reactions of work.

TEXTS 8—9

ﬁaﬁﬁw‘iﬁﬁrgﬁﬁﬁaaaﬁal
WII‘II

Wﬁaanmﬁwﬁrﬁsﬁﬁ
eﬁawﬁﬁméigaér—deﬁrumhau

haiva kiﬁcit karomiti
yukto manyeta tattva—vit
pas’yaﬁ s’mvah sprs’aﬁ jighrcmh
as’hcm gacchcm svapcm s’vascm

pralapcm visrjcm grhhahh
unmiscm himisahh api
ihdriyahihdriyarthesu



vartcmta iti dhciraycm

SYNONYMS

ha—never; eva—certainly; kiﬁcit—anything; karomi—I do; iti—thus;
yuktah—engaged in the divine consciousness; mahyeta—thinks;
tattUa—vit—one who knows the truth; pas’yah—seeing; s’mvah—hearing;
sprs’cm—touching; jighrcm—smelling; as’hah—eating; gacchcm—going;
svapah—dreaming; s’vasah—breathing; pralapah—talking; visrjcm—giving up;
grhhah—accepting; unmisah—opening; himisah—closing; api—in spite of;
ihdriyc‘mi—the senses; ihdriya—arthesu—in sense gratification; vartcmte—let
them be so engaged; iti—thus; dhc‘trayah—considering.

TRANSLATION

A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing, hearing,
touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping and breathing, always knows
Within himself that he actually does nothing at all. Because While speaking,
evacuating, receiving, or opening or closing his eyes, he always knows that only
the material senses are engaged With their objects and that he is aloof from
them.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness is pure in his existence, and consequently
he has nothing to do with any work which depends upon five immediate and
remote causes: the doer, the work, the situation, the endeavor and fortune.
This is because he is engaged in the loving transcendental service of Krsna.
Although he appears to be acting with his body and senses, he is always
conscious of his actual position, which is spiritual engagement. In material
consciousness, the senses are engaged in sense gratification, but in Krsna
consciousness the senses are engaged in the satisfaction of Krsna’s senses.
Therefore, the Krsna conscious person is always free, even though he appears
to be engaged in affairs of the senses. Activities such as seeing and hearing are



actions of the senses meant for receiving knowledge, whereas moving,
speaking, evacuating, etc., are actions of the senses meant for work. A Krsna
conscious person is never affected by the actions of the senses. He cannot
perform any act except in the service of the Lord because he knows that he is
the eternal servitor of the Lord.

TEXT 10

memmm
WHHWWWIHMI

brahmahy adhc‘tya karmahi

sahgam tyaktvc‘t karoti yah
lipyate ha sa papeha

padma—patram ivc‘tmbhasc‘t

SYNONYMS

brahmahi—unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhc'tya—resigning;
karmahi—all works; sahgam—attachment; tyaktvd—giving up;
karoti—performs; yah—who; lipyate—is affected; ha—never; sah—he;
papeha—by sin; padma—patram—a lotus leaf; iva—like; ambhasc‘t—by the
water.

TRANSLATION

One Who performs his duty Without attachment, surrendering the results
unto the Supreme Lord, is unaffected by sinful action, as the lotus leaf is
untouched by water.

PURPORT

Here brahmahi means in Krsna consciousness. The material world is a sum
total manifestation of the three modes of material nature, technically called



the pradhc‘ma. The Vedic hymns sarvam hy etad brahma (Mandﬁkya Upam'sad
2), tasmc‘td etad brahma hama—rﬁpam anham ca jayate (Mandala Upam'sad
1.2.10), and, in the Bbagavad—gité (14.3), mama yom'r mahad brahma indicate
that everything in the material world is a manifestation of Brahman; and
although the effects are differently manifested, they are nondifferent from the
cause. In the Isopahisad it is said that everything is related to the Supreme
Brahman, or Krsna, and thus everything belongs to Him only. One who knows
perfectly well that everything belongs to Krsna, that He is the proprietor of
everything and that, therefore, everything is engaged in the service of the
Lord, naturally has nothing to do with the results of his activities, whether
Virtuous or sinful. Even one’s material body, being a gift of the Lord for
carrying out a particular type of action, can be engaged in Krsna
consciousness. It is then beyond contamination by sinful reactions, exactly as
the lotus leaf, though remaining in the water, is not wet. The Lord also says in
the Gite (3.30), mayi sarvc‘mi karmahi sannyasya: “Resign all works unto Me
[Krsna].” The conclusion is that a person without Krsna consciousness acts
according to the concept of the material body and senses, but a person in
Krsna consciousness acts according to the knowledge that the body is the
property of Krsna and should therefore be engaged in the service of Krsna.

TEXT 11

WwwWﬁﬁtﬁI
W:$§WH§W’E§II99II

kayeha mahasc‘t buddhyc‘t
kevalair ihdriyair api
yogihah karma kurvcmti
sahgam tyaktvc‘ttma—s’uddhaye

SYNONYMS

kayeha—with the body; mahasc‘t—with the mind; buddhyc‘t—with the



intelligence; kevalaih—purified; ihdriyaih—with the senses; api—even;
yogihah—Krsna conscious persons; karma—actions; kmvcmti—they perform;
sahgam—attachment; tyaktvd—giving up; citma—of the self; s’uddhaye—for
the purpose of purification.

TRANSLATION

The yogis, abandoning attachment, act With body, mind, intelligence and
even With the senses, only for the purpose of purification.

PURPORT

When one acts in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction of the senses of
Krsna, any action, whether of the body, mind, intelligence or even the senses,
is purified of material contamination. There are no material reactions
resulting from the activities of a Krsna conscious person. Therefore purified
activities, which are generally called sad-c‘tcc‘tm, can be easily performed by
acting in Krsna consciousness. Sri Rfipa Gosvami in his

Bbakti-rasﬁmrta-smdbu (1.2.187) describes this as follows:

that yasya hater dasye

karmahc‘t mahasc‘t girc‘t
m'khilc‘tsv apy avasthc‘tsu
jivah—muktah sa ucyate

“A person acting in Krsna consciousness (or, in other words, in the service
of Krsna) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a liberated person
even within the material world, although he may be engaged in many so-called
material activities.” He has no false ego, for he does not believe that he is this
material body, or that he possesses the body. He knows that he is not this body
and that this body does not belong to him. He himself belongs to Krsna, and
the body too belongs to Krsna. When he applies everything produced of the
body, mind, intelligence, words, life, wealth, etc.—whatever he may have
within his possession—to Krsna’s service, he is at once dovetailed with Krsna.
He is one with Krsna and is devoid of the false ego that leads one to believe



that he is the body, etc. This is the perfect stage of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 12

ﬁzmwmﬁﬁml
Wzmqﬁsmﬁﬁwﬁunu

yuktah karma—phalam tyaktvc‘t
s’c‘mtim cipnoti haisthikim
ayuktah kama-kc‘weha
phale sakto hibadhyate

SYNONYMS

yuktah—one who is engaged in devotional service; karma-phalam—the results
of all activities; tyaktvc't—giving up; s’c'mtim—perfect peace; cipnoti—achieves;
haisthikim—unﬂinching; ayuktah—one who is not in Krsna consciousness;
kama-kareha—for enjoying the result of work; phale—in the result;
saktah—attached; hibadhyate—becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

The steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers the
result of all activities to Me; Whereas a person Who is not in union With the
Divine, Who is greedy for the fruits of his labor, becomes entangled.

PURPORT

The difference between a person in Krsna consciousness and a person in
bodily consciousness is that the former is attached to Krsna whereas the latter
is attached to the results of his activities. The person who is attached to Krsna
and works for Him only is certainly a liberated person, and he has no anxiety
over the results of his work. In the Bhagavatam, the cause of anxiety over the
result of an activity is explained as being one’s functioning in the conception



of duality, that is, without knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Krsna is the
Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead. In Krsna consciousness,
there is no duality. All that exists is a product of Krsna’s energy, and Krsna is
all good. Therefore, activities in Krsna consciousness are on the absolute
plane; they are transcendental and have no material effect. One is therefore
filled with peace in Krsna consciousness. But one who is entangled in profit
calculation for sense gratification cannot have that peace. This is the secret of
Krsna consciousness—realization that there is no existence besides Krsna is
the platform of peace and fearlessness.

TEXT 13

Wmamﬁaﬁaﬁﬁl
Wataﬁﬁaﬁammau

sarva-karmc‘mi mahasc‘t
scmhyasyc‘tste sukham vas’i
hava—dvc‘tre pure dehi
haiva kurvcm ha kc‘waycm

SYNONYMS

sarva—all; karmahi—activities; mahasc‘t—by the mind; sannyasya—giving up;
ciste—remains; sukham—in happiness; vas’i—one who is controlled;
hava-dvc'n'e—in the place where there are nine gates; puTe—in the city;
dehi—the embodied soul; ha—never; eva—certainly; kmvcm—doing anything;
ha—not; karayah—causing to be done.

TRANSLATION

When the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally renounces
all actions, he resides happily in the city of nine gates [the material body],
neither working nor causing work to be done.



PURPORT

The embodied soul lives in the city of nine gates. The activities of the body,
or the figurative city of body, are conducted automatically by its particular
modes of nature. The soul, although subjecting himself to the conditions of the
body, can be beyond those conditions, if he so desires. Owing only to
forgetfulness of his superior nature, he identifies with the material body, and
therefore suffers. By Krsna consciousness, he can revive his real position and
thus come out of his embodiment. Therefore, when one takes to Krsna
consciousness, one at once becomes completely aloof from bodily activities. In
such a controlled life, in which his deliberations are changed, he lives happily
within the city of nine gates. The nine gates are mentioned as follows:

hava—dvc‘tre pure dehi

hamso lelciyate bahih

vas’i sarvasya lokasya
sthc‘warasya carasya ca

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is living within the body of a
living entity, is the controller of all living entities all over the universe. The
body consists of nine gates [two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, one mouth, the
anus and the genitals]. The living entity in his conditioned stage identifies
himself with the body, but when he identifies himself with the Lord within
himself, he becomes just as free as the Lord, even while in the body.”
(gvetéivatara Upam'saa 3.18)

Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is free from both the outer and inner
activities of the material body.

TEXT 14

aaﬁﬁiﬁmaﬁmaﬁﬁrmzl
?Wmmﬁuwu



ha kartrtvam ha karmahi
lokasya srjati prabhuh
ha karma—phala—samyogam
svabhc‘was tu pravartate

SYNONYMS

ha—never; kartrtvam—proprietorship; ha—nor; karmahi—activities;
lokasya—of the people; srjati—creates; prabhuh—the master of the city of the
body; ha—nor; karma—phala—with the results of activities;
samyogam—connection; svabhc‘wah—the modes of material nature; tu—but;
pravartate—act.

TRANSLATION

The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create activities,
nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create the fruits of action. All this
is enacted by the modes of material nature.

PURPORT

The living entity, as will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, is one of the
energies or natures of the Supreme Lord but is distinct from matter, which is
another nature—called inferior—of the Lord. Somehow the superior nature,
the living entity, has been in contact with material nature since time
immemorial. The temporary body or material dwelling place which he obtains
is the cause of varieties of activities and their resultant reactions. Living in
such a conditional atmosphere, one suffers the results of the activities of the
body by identifying himself (in ignorance) with the body. It is ignorance
acquired from time immemorial that is the cause of bodily suffering and
distress. As soon as the living entity becomes aloof from the activities of the
body, he becomes free from the reactions as well. As long as he is in the city of
body, he appears to be the master of it, but actually he is neither its proprietor
nor controller of its actions and reactions. He is simply in the midst of the



material ocean, struggling for existence. The waves of the ocean are tossing
him, and he has no control over them. His best solution is to get out of the
water by transcendental Krsna consciousness. That alone will save him from
all turmoil.

TEXT 15

ﬁwﬁaﬁﬁé‘aqﬁﬁgzl
Wehﬁaaﬁwaaazuwu

midatte kasyacit papam
ha caiva sukrtam vibhuh
ajﬁdhehc‘wrtam jﬁc‘mam
teha muhyahti jcmtavah

SYNONYMS

ha—never; cidatte—accepts; kasyacit—anyone’s; papam—sin; ha—nor;
ca—also; eva—certainly; su—krtam—pious activities; vibhuh—the Supreme
Lord; ajﬁc‘meha—by ignorance; avrtam—covered; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
teha—by that; muhyahti—are bewildered; jcmtavah—the living entities.

TRANSLATION

Nor does the Supreme Lord assume anyone’s sinful or pious activities.
Embodied beings, however, are bewildered because of the ignorance Which
covers their real knowledge.

PURPORT

The Sanskrit word Uibhu means the Supreme Lord who is full of unlimited
knowledge, riches, strength, fame, beauty and renunciation. He is always
satisfied in Himself, undisturbed by sinful or pious activities. He does not
create a particular situation for any living entity, but the living entity,



bewildered by ignorance, desires to be put into certain conditions of life, and
thereby his chain of action and reaction begins. A living entity is, by superior
nature, full of knowledge. Nevertheless, he is prone to be influenced by
ignorance due to his limited power. The Lord is omnipotent, but the living
entity is not. The Lord is Uibhu, or omniscient, but the living entity is emu, or
atomic. Because he is a living soul, he has the capacity to desire by his free will.
Such desire is fulfilled only by the omnipotent Lord. And so, when the living
entity is bewildered in his desires, the Lord allows him to fulfill those desires,
but the Lord is never responsible for the actions and reactions of the particular
situation which may be desired. Being in a bewildered condition, therefore, the
embodied soul identifies himself with the circumstantial material body and
becomes subjected to the temporary misery and happiness of life. The Lord is
the constant companion of the living entity as Paramatma, or the Supersoul,
and therefore He can understand the desires of the individual soul, as one can
smell the flavor of a ﬂower by being near it. Desire is a subtle form of
conditioning for the living entity. The Lord fulfills his desire as he deserves:
Man proposes and God disposes. The individual is not, therefore, omnipotent
in fulfilling his desires. The Lord, however, can fulfill all desires, and the Lord,
being neutral to everyone, does not interfere with the desires of the minute
independent living entities. However, when one desires Krsna, the Lord takes
special care and encourages one to desire in such a way that one can attain to
Him and be eternally happy. The Vedic hymns therefore declare, esa u hy eva
sadhu karma karayati tam yam ebhyo lokebhya uhhihisate. esa u evc‘tsc‘tdhu karma
karayati yam adho nihisate: “The Lord engages the living entity in pious
activities so that he may be elevated. The Lord engages him in impious
activities so that he may go to hell.” (K311517316 Upam'saa 3.8)

ajﬁo jcmtm anis’o ’yam
dtmcmah sukha—duhkhayoh

is’vam-prerito gacchet
svargam vc‘ts’v abhram eva ca

“The living entity is completely dependent in his distress and happiness. By
the will of the Supreme he can go to heaven or hell, as a cloud is driven by the



air.”

Therefore the embodied soul, by his immemorial desire to avoid Krsna
consciousness, causes his own bewilderment. Consequently, although he is
constitutionally eternal, blissful and cognizant, due to the littleness of his
existence he forgets his constitutional position of service to the Lord and is
thus entrapped by nescience. And, under the spell of ignorance, the living
entity claims that the Lord is responsible for his conditional existence. The
Vedanta-sﬁtras (2.1.34) also confirm this. Vaisamya—hairghmye ha scipeksatvc‘tt
tathc't hi dars’ayati: “The Lord neither hates nor likes anyone, though He
appears to.”

TEXT 16

eﬁﬁgmﬁwmzl
WWWIIWH

jhc‘meha tu tad ajﬁc‘mam

yesc‘tm mis’itam dtmcmah

tesc‘tm aditya—vaj jﬁc‘mam
prakc‘ts’ayati tat param

SYNONYMS

jﬁc‘meha—by knowledge; tu—but; tat—that; ajﬁdham—nescience;
yesc‘tm—whose; has’itam—is destroyed; citmahah—of the living entity;
tesdm—their; aditya—Uat—like the rising sun; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
prakc‘ts’ayati—discloses; tat param—Krsna consciousness.

TRANSLATION

When, however, one is enlightened With the knowledge by Which nescience
is destroyed, then his knowledge reveals everything, as the sun lights up
everything in the daytime.



PURPORT

Those who have forgotten Krsna must certainly be bewildered, but those
who are in Krsna consciousness are not bewildered at all. It is stated in the
Bhagavad—gitc‘t, sarvam jﬁc‘ma—plaveha, jﬁc‘mc‘tghih sarva-karmc‘mi and 71a hi
jﬁc‘meha sadrs’am. Knowledge is always highly esteemed. And what is that
knowledge? Perfect knowledge is achieved when one surrenders unto Krsna, as
is said in the Seventh Chapter, 19th verse: bahﬁnc‘tm jahmahc‘tm cmte jﬁc‘mavc‘m
mam prapadyate. After passing through many, many births, when one perfect
in knowledge surrenders unto Krsna, or when one attains Krsna consciousness,
then everything is revealed to him, as everything is revealed by the sun in the
daytime. The living entity is bewildered in so many ways. For instance, when
he unceremoniously thinks himself God, he actually falls into the last snare of
nescience. If a living entity is God, then how can he become bewildered by
nescience? Does God become bewildered by nescience? If so, then nescience,
or Satan, is greater than God. Real knowledge can be obtained from a person
who is in perfect Krsna consciousness. Therefore, one has to seek out such a
bona fide spiritual master and, under him, learn what Krsna consciousness is,
for Krsna consciousness will certainly drive away all nescience, as the sun
drives away darkness. Even though a person may be in full knowledge that he
is not this body but is transcendental to the body, he still may not be able to
discriminate between the soul and the Supersoul. However, he can know
everything well if he cares to take shelter of the perfect, bona fide Krsna
conscious spiritual master. One can know God and one’s relationship with
God only when one actually meets a representative of God. A representative
of God never claims that he is God, although he is paid all the respect
ordinarily paid to God because he has knowledge of God. One has to learn the
distinction between God and the living entity. Lord Sri Krsna therefore stated
in the Second Chapter (2.12) that every living being is individual and that the
Lord also is individual. They were all individuals in the past, they are
individuals at present, and they will continue to be individuals in the future,
even after liberation. At night we see everything as one in the darkness, but in
day, when the sun is up, we see everything in its real identity. Identity with



individuality in spiritual life is real knowledge.

TEXT 17

WW:
31W WW: II 99 ||

tad—buddhayas tad—c‘ttmc‘mas
tcm-histhcis tat—parc‘tyahcih
gacchcmty apunar—c‘wrttim
jﬁaha-hirdhﬁta—kalmasah

SYNONYMS

tat-buddhayah—those whose intelligence is always in the Supreme;
tat-c'ttmc'mah—those whose minds are always in the Supreme;
tat-histhc'th—those whose faith is only meant for the Supreme;
tat—parc‘tyahcih—who have completely taken shelter of Him; gacchcmti—go;
apuhah—c‘wrttim—to liberation; jﬁc‘ma—by knowledge; m'rthZta—cleansed;
kalmasc‘th—misgivings.

TRANSLATION

When one’s intelligence, mind, faith and refuge are all fixed in the Supreme,
then one becomes fully cleansed of misgivings through complete knowledge and
thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.

PURPORT

The Supreme Transcendental Truth is Lord Krsna. The whole
Bhagavad-gitc‘t centers around the declaration that Krsna is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is the version of all Vedic literature. PaTa-tattva
means the Supreme Reality, who is understood by the knowers of the Supreme
as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality



of Godhead, is the last word in the Absolute. There is nothing more than that.
The Lord says, mattah parataram hc‘myat kiﬁcid asti dhahahjaya. Impersonal
Brahman is also supported by Krsna: brahmaho hi pratisthc'tham. Therefore in
all ways Krsna is the Supreme Reality. One whose mind, intelligence, faith and
refuge are always in Krsna, or, in other words, one who is fully in Krsna
consciousness, is undoubtedly washed clean of all misgivings and is in perfect
knowledge in everything concerning transcendence. A Krsna conscious person
can thoroughly understand that there is duality (simultaneous identity and
individuality) in Krsna, and, equipped with such transcendental knowledge,
one can make steady progress on the path of liberation.

TEXT 18

WWﬁaﬁﬁﬁl
ﬁﬁﬁﬁmaqﬁemzwﬁhzuwu

vidyc‘t—vihaya—sampahhe
brc‘thmahe gavi hastim'
s’um' caiva s’va—pc‘tke ca

pahditc‘th sama-dars’ihah

SYNONYMS

Uidyd—With education; vihaya—and gentleness; sampahhe—fully equipped;
brc‘thmahe—in the brahmaha; gavi—in the cow; hastihi—in the elephant;
s’uhi—in the dog; ca—and; eva—certainly; s’va-pc‘tke—in the dog-eater (the
outcaste); ca—respectively; panditc‘th—those who are wise;
sama—dars’ihah—who see with equal Vision.

TRANSLATION

The humble sages, by Virtue of true knowledge, see With equal Vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater
[outcaste].



PURPORT

A Krsna conscious person does not make any distinction between species or
castes. The brc‘thmaha and the outcaste may be different from the social point
of View, or a dog, a cow, and an elephant may be different from the point of
View of species, but these differences of body are meaningless from the
Viewpoint of a learned transcendentalist. This is due to their relationship to
the Supreme, for the Supreme Lord, by His plenary portion as Paramatma, is
present in everyone’s heart. Such an understanding of the Supreme is real
knowledge. As far as the bodies are concerned in different castes or different
species of life, the Lord is equally kind to everyone because He treats every
living being as a friend yet maintains Himself as Paramatma regardless of the
circumstances of the living entities. The Lord as Paramatma is present both in
the outcaste and in the brdhmaha, although the body of a brahmaha and that
of an outcaste are not the same. The bodies are material productions of
different modes of material nature, but the soul and the Supersoul within the
body are of the same spiritual quality. The similarity in the quality of the soul
and the Supersoul, however, does not make them equal in quantity, for the
individual soul is present only in that particular body whereas the Paramatma
is present in each and every body. A Krsna conscious person has full
knowledge of this, and therefore he is truly learned and has equal Vision. The
similar characteristics of the soul and Supersoul are that they are both
conscious, eternal and blissful. But the difference is that the individual soul is
conscious within the limited jurisdiction of the body whereas the Supersoul is
conscious of all bodies. The Supersoul is present in all bodies without
distinction.

TEXT 19

séaﬁﬁiazmﬁWHﬁﬁuesz
ﬁﬁdiﬁaﬁaawmﬁiémunw



ihaiva tair jitah sargo
yesc‘tm scimye sthitam mahah
hirdosam hi samam brahma
tasmc‘td brahmahi te sthitc‘th

SYNONYMS

iha—in this life; eva—certainly; taih—by them; jitah—conquered;
sargah—birth and death; yesc‘Im—whose; scimye—in equanimity;
sthitam—situated; mahah—mind; hirdosam—ﬂawless; hi—certainly;
samam—in equanimity; brahma—like the Supreme; tasmc‘It—therefore;
brahmahi—in the Supreme; te—they; sthitc‘th—are situated.

TRANSLATION

Those Whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have already
conquered the conditions of birth and death. They are flawless like Brahman,
and thus they are already situated in Brahman.

PURPORT

Equanimity of mind, as mentioned above, is the sign of self-realization.
Those who have actually attained to such a stage should be considered to have
conquered material conditions, specifically birth and death. As long as one
identifies with this body, he is considered a conditioned soul, but as soon as he
is elevated to the stage of equanimity through realization of self, he is liberated
from conditional life. In other words, he is no longer subject to take birth in
the material world but can enter into the spiritual sky after his death. The
Lord is ﬂawless because He is without attraction or hatred. Similarly, when a
living entity is without attraction or hatred, he also becomes ﬂawless and
eligible to enter into the spiritual sky. Such persons are to be considered
already liberated, and their symptoms are described below.

TEXT 20



HWWWWI
WWMHIQN

ha prahrsyet priyam prc‘tpya
hodvijet prc‘tpya cc‘tpriyam
sthira—buddhir asammﬁdho
brahma-vid brahmahi sthitah

SYNONYMS

ha—never; prahrsyet—rejoices; priyam—the pleasant; prdpya—achieving;
ha—does not; udvijet—become agitated; prc‘tpya—obtaining; ca—also;
apriyam—the unpleasant; sthira-buddhih—self-intelligent;
asammﬁdhah—unbewildered; brahma—vit—one who knows the Supreme
perfectly; brahmahi—in the transcendence; sthitah—situated.

TRANSLATION

A person Who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor
laments upon obtaining something unpleasant, Who is self-intelligent, Who is
unbewildered, and Who knows the science of God, is already situated in
transcendence.

PURPORT

The symptoms of the self-realized person are given herein. The first
symptom is that he is not illusioned by the false identification of the body with
his true self. He knows perfectly well that he is not this body, but is the
fragmental portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is therefore
not joyful in achieving something, nor does he lament in losing anything
which is related to his body. This steadiness of mind is called sthiTa-buddhi, or
self-intelligence. He is therefore never bewildered by mistaking the gross body
for the soul, nor does he accept the body as permanent and disregard the



existence of the soul. This knowledge elevates him to the station of knowing
the complete science of the Absolute Truth, namely Brahman, Paramatma and
Bhagavan. He thus knows his constitutional position perfectly well, without
falsely trying to become one with the Supreme in all respects. This is called
Brahman realization, or self-realization. Such steady consciousness is called
Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 21

WWWI
HWWWQQIIQMI

bahya—spars’esv asaktc‘ttmc‘t

vihdaty citmcmi yat sukham

sa brahma—yoga—yuktc‘ttmc‘t
sukham aksayam as’hute

SYNONYMS

bahya—spars’esu—in external sense pleasure; asakta—c‘ttmc‘t—one who is not
attached; vihdati—enjoys; citmahi—in the self; yat—that which;
sukham—happiness; sah—he; brahma—yoga—by concentration in Brahman;
yukta—c‘ttmc‘t—self-connected; sukham—happiness; aksayam—unlimited;
as’hute—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

Such a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure but is
always in trance, enjoying the pleasure Within. In this way the self-realized
person enjoys unlimited happiness, for he concentrates on the Supreme.

PURPORT

Sri Yamunacarya, a great devotee in Krsna consciousness, said:



yad-avadhi mama cetah krsha—pc‘tdamvihde
hava—hava-rasa—dhc‘tmahy udyatam rahtum asit

tad—avadhi bata hari—sahgame smaryamc‘me
bhavati mukha—vikc‘trah susthu histhivaham ca

“Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of Krsna,
realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sex pleasure I spit at
the thought, and my lips curl with distaste.” A person in brahma-yoga, or
Krsna consciousness, is so absorbed in the loving service of the Lord that he
loses his taste for material sense pleasure altogether. The highest pleasure in
terms of matter is sex pleasure. The whole world is moving under its spell, and
a materialist cannot work at all without this motivation. But a person engaged
in Krsna consciousness can work with greater Vigor without sex pleasure,
which he avoids. That is the test in spiritual realization. Spiritual realization
and sex pleasure go ill together. A Krsna conscious person is not attracted to
any kind of sense pleasure, due to his being a liberated soul.

TEXT 22

Wzﬁﬁwﬁﬁqmﬁqazuqqu

ye hi samspars’a-jc‘t bhogc‘t
duhkha—yonaya eva te

ddy—ahtavahtah kauhteya
ha tesu ramate budhah

SYNONYMS

ye—those; hi—certainly; samspars’a-jc'th—by contact with the material senses;
bhogc‘th—enjoyments; duhkha—distress; yonayah—sources of; eva—certainly;
te—they are; adi—beginning; anta—end; vantah—subject to; kauhteya—O
son of Kunti; ha—never; tesu—in those; ramate—takes delight; budhah—the
intelligent person.



TRANSLATION

An intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery, Which are
due to contact With the material senses. 0 son of Kunti, such pleasures have a
beginning and an end, and so the Wise man does not delight in them.

PURPORT

Material sense pleasures are due to the contact of the material senses, which
are all temporary because the body itself is temporary. A liberated soul is not
interested in anything which is temporary. Knowing well the joys of
transcendental pleasures, how can a liberated soul agree to enjoy false
pleasure? In the Padma Puraha it is said:

ramcmte yogino ’ncmte
satyc‘mahde cid—c‘ttmahi
iti rc‘tma-padehc‘tsau
param brahmc‘tbhidhiyate

“The mystics derive unlimited transcendental pleasures from the Absolute
Truth, and therefore the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of
Godhead, is also known as Rama.”

In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also (5.5.1) it is said:

hayam deho deha—bhc‘tjc‘tm m—loke
kastc‘m kamc‘m arhate vid—bhujdm ye
tapo divyam putrakc‘t yeha sattvam
s’uddhyed yasmc‘td brahma—saukhyam tv ahcmtam

“My dear sons, there is no reason to labor very hard for sense pleasure while
in this human form of life; such pleasures are available to the stool-eaters
[hogs]. Rather, you should undergo penances in this life by which your
existence will be purified, and as a result you will be able to enjoy unlimited
transcendental bliss.”

Therefore, those who are true yogis or learned transcendentalists are not



attracted by sense pleasures, which are the causes of continuous material
existence. The more one is addicted to material pleasures, the more he is
entrapped by material miseries.

TEXT 23

aﬁeﬁéauzﬁigmﬁﬁaml
maﬁaﬁzawmzuqsu

s’akhotihaiva yah sodhum
prc‘tk s’arira—vimoksahdt
kama—krodhodbhavam vegam
sa yuktah sa sukhi harah

SYNONYMS

s’akhoti—is able; iha eva—in the present body; yah—one who; sodhum—to
tolerate; prc‘tk—before; s’arira—the body; vimoksahc‘tt—giving up;
kama—desire; krodha—and anger; udbhavam—generated from; vegam—urges;
sah—he; yuktah—in trance; sah—he; sukhi—happy; harah—human being.

TRANSLATION

Before giving up this present body, if one is able to tolerate the urges of the
material senses and check the force of desire and anger, he is well situated and
is happy in this world.

PURPORT

If one wants to make steady progress on the path of self-realization, he must
try to control the forces of the material senses. There are the forces of talk,
forces of anger, forces of mind, forces of the stomach, forces of the genitals,
and forces of the tongue. One who is able to control the forces of all these
different senses, and the mind, is called gosvc‘tmi, or svc‘tmi. Such gosvc‘tmis live



strictly controlled lives, and forgo altogether the forces of the senses. Material
desires, when unsatiated, generate anger, and thus the mind, eyes and chest
become agitated. Therefore, one must practice to control them before one
gives up this material body. One who can do this is understood to be
self-realized and is thus happy in the state of self-realization. It is the duty of
the transcendentalist to try strenuously to control desire and anger.

TEXT 24

aisazaliriswmﬁrma‘iﬁﬁa 9:: I
Hﬁvﬁaaﬁaﬁwﬁsmwﬁru Q8 ||

yo ’htah—sukho ’htar—arc‘tmas
tathc‘mtar—jyotir eva yah
sa yogi brahma—hirvc‘mam
brahma—bhﬁto ’dhigacchati

SYNONYMS

yah—one who; antah—sukhah—happy from within; antah—c‘trc‘tmah—actively
enjoying within; tathc't—as well as; antah-jyotih—aiming within;
eva—certainly; yah—anyone; sah—he; yogi—a mystic;
brahma—hirvc‘mam—liberation in the Supreme; brahma—bhﬁtah—being
self-realized; adhigacchati—attains.

TRANSLATION

One Whose happiness is Within, Who is active and rejoices Within, and Whose
aim is inward is actually the perfect mystic. He is liberated in the Supreme, and
ultimately he attains the Supreme.

PURPORT

Unless one is able to relish happiness from within, how can one retire from



the external engagements meant for deriving superficial happiness.7 A
liberated person enjoys happiness by factual experience. He can, therefore, sit
silently at any place and enjoy the activities of life from within. Such a
liberated person no longer desires external material happiness. This state is
called brahma-bhﬁta, attaining which one is assured of going back to Godhead,
back to home.

TEXT 25

mﬁaaﬁahmwﬁww
Wwwmaﬁﬁﬁﬁmuqau

labhcmte brahma—hirvc‘mam
Tsayah ksiha—kalmasc‘th

chihha—dvaidhc‘t yatc‘ttmc‘mah
sarva—bhﬁta—hite ratc‘th

SYNONYMS

labhcmte—achieve; brahma—hirvc‘mam—liberation in the Supreme;
Tsayah—those who are active within; ksiha—kalmasc‘th—who are devoid of all
sins; chihha—having torn off; dvaidhc‘th—duality; yata—c‘ttmc‘mah—engaged in
self-realization; sarva-bhﬁta—for all living entities; hite—in welfare work;
mtc‘th—engaged.

TRANSLATION

Those Who are beyond the dualities that arise from doubts, Whose minds are
engaged Within, Who are always busy working for the welfare of all living
beings, and Who are free from all sins achieve liberation in the Supreme.

PURPORT

Only a person who is fully in Krsna consciousness can be said to be engaged



in welfare work for all living entities. When a person is actually in the
knowledge that Krsna is the fountainhead of everything, then when he acts in
that spirit he acts for everyone. The sufferings of humanity are due to
forgetfulness of Krsna as the supreme enjoyer, the supreme proprietor, and the
supreme friend. Therefore, to act to revive this consciousness within the entire
human society is the highest welfare work. One cannot be engaged in such
first-class welfare work without being liberated in the Supreme. A Krsna
conscious person has no doubt about the supremacy of Krsna. He has no doubt
because he is completely freed from all sins. This is the state of divine love.

A person engaged only in ministering to the physical welfare of human
society cannot factually help anyone. Temporary relief of the external body
and the mind is not satisfactory. The real cause of one’s difficulties in the hard
struggle for life may be found in one’s forgetfulness of his relationship with the
Supreme Lord. When a man is fully conscious of his relationship with Krsna,
he is actually a liberated soul, although he may be in the material tabernacle.

TEXT 26

WWWWI
afﬁa‘raerﬁaﬁaﬁﬁﬁrﬁamﬁuqau

kama—krodha-vimuktc‘mc‘tm
yatihc‘tm yata—cetascim
abhito brahma—hirvc‘mam
vartate viditc‘ttmam‘tm

SYNONYMS

kama—from desires; krodha—and anger; vimuktc‘mc‘tm—of those who are
liberated; yatihc‘tm—of the saintly persons; yata-cetasc‘tm—who have full
control over the mind; abhitah—assured in the near future;
brahma—hirvc‘mam—liberation in the Supreme; vartate—is there;
Uidita-c'ttmam'tm—of those who are self-realized.



TRANSLATION

Those Who are free from anger and all material desires, Who are self-realized,
self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection, are assured of
liberation in the Supreme in the very near future.

PURPORT

Of the saintly persons who are constantly engaged in striving toward
salvation, one who is in Krsna consciousness is the best of all. The Bbzigavatam

(4.22.39) confirms this fact as follows:

yat-pcida—pahkaja—palc‘ts’awildsa—bhaktyc‘t
karmas’ayam grathitam udgrathayahti santah
tadvcm ha rikta—matayo yatayo ’pi ruddha—
sroto-gahc‘ts tam araham bhaja vdsudevam

“Just try to worship, in devotional service, Vasudeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even great sages are not able to control the forces of
the senses as effectively as those who are engaged in transcendental bliss by
serving the lotus feet of the Lord, uprooting the deep-grown desire for fruitive
activities.”

In the conditioned soul the desire to enjoy the fruitive results of work is so
deep rooted that it is very difficult even for the great sages to control such
desires, despite great endeavors. A devotee of the Lord, constantly engaged in
devotional service in Krsna consciousness, perfect in self-realization, very
quickly attains liberation in the Supreme. Owing to his complete knowledge in

self-realization, he always remains in trance. To cite an analogous example of
this:

dars’cma—dhyc‘ma—samspars’air

matsya—kmma—vihahgamc‘th
svc‘my apatyc‘mi pushahti
tathc‘tham api padma—ja



“By Vision, by meditation and by touch only do the fish, the tortoise and the
birds maintain their offspring. Similarly do I also, 0 Padmaja!”

The fish brings up its offspring simply by looking at them. The tortoise
brings up its offspring simply by meditation. The eggs of the tortoise are laid
on land, and the tortoise meditates on the eggs while in the water. Similarly,
the devotee in Krsna consciousness, although far away from the Lord’s abode,
can elevate himself to that abode simply by thinking of Him constantly—by
engagement in Krsna consciousness. He does not feel the pangs of material
miseries; this state of life is called brahma-nirvc‘ma, or the absence of material
miseries due to being constantly immersed in the Supreme.

TEXTS 27—28

WWﬂgﬁm-‘cﬁgﬁn
mﬁaﬁwwaeﬁrﬁﬁuwu

WWM
Wﬁzaﬁiﬁﬂ-‘IWHHIQ‘H

spars’c‘m krtvd bahir bahyams’
caksus’ caivc‘mtare bhmvoh
prahapc‘mau samau krtvd
hasabhyahtara—cc‘wihau

yatehdriya—maho—buddhir
muhir moksa—parc‘tyahah
vigatecchc‘t—bhaya—krodho
yah sadc‘t mukta eva sah

SYNONYMS

spars’c'm—sense objects, such as sound; krtvc‘t—keeping; bahih—external;
bahyc‘m—unnecessary; caksuh—eyes; ca—also; eva—certainly;
antare—between; bhruvoh—the eyebrows; prc‘ma—apc‘mau—up-and



down-moving air; samau—in suspension; krtvc‘t—keeping;
hasa—abhyahtara—within the nostrils; carihau—blowing; yata—controlled;
ihdriya—senses; mahah—mind; buddhih—intelligence; muhih—the
transcendentalist; moksa—for liberation; parayahah—being so destined;
vigata—having discarded; icchc‘L—wishes; bhaya—fear; krodhah—anger;
yah—one who; sadc‘t—always; muktah—liberated; eva—certainly; sah—he is.

TRANSLATION

Shutting out all external sense objects, keeping the eyes and Vision
concentrated between the two eyebrows, suspending the inward and outward
breaths Within the nostrils, and thus controlling the mind, senses and
intelligence, the transcendentalist aiming at liberation becomes free from desire,
fear and anger. One Who is always in this state is certainly liberated.

PURPORT

Being engaged in Krsna consciousness, one can immediately understand
one’s spiritual identity, and then one can understand the Supreme Lord by
means of devotional service. When one is well situated in devotional service,
one comes to the transcendental position, qualified to feel the presence of the
Lord in the sphere of one’s activity. This particular position is called liberation
in the Supreme.

After explaining the above principles of liberation in the Supreme, the
Lord gives instruction to Arjuna as to how one can come to that position by
the practice of the mysticism or yoga known as astahga—yoga, which is divisible
into an eightfold procedure called yama, hiyama, ciscma, prahayc‘tma,
pratyc‘thc‘tra, dhc‘trahc‘t, dhyc‘ma and samadhi. In the Sixth Chapter the subject of
yoga is explicitly detailed, and at the end of the Fifth it is only preliminarily
explained. One has to drive out the sense objects such as sound, touch, form,
taste and smell by the pratyc'thc'n'a process in yoga, and then keep the Vision of
the eyes between the two eyebrows and concentrate on the tip of the nose
with half-closed lids. There is no benefit in closing the eyes altogether, because
then there is every chance of falling asleep. Nor is there benefit in opening the



eyes completely, because then there is the hazard of being attracted by sense
objects. The breathing movement is restrained within the nostrils by
neutralizing the up-moving and down-moving air within the body. By practice
of such yoga one is able to gain control over the senses, refrain from outward
sense objects, and thus prepare oneself for liberation in the Supreme.

This yoga process helps one become free from all kinds of fear and anger
and thus feel the presence of the Supersoul in the transcendental situation. In
other words, Krsna consciousness is the easiest process of executing yoga
principles. This will be thoroughly explained in the next chapter. A Krsna
conscious person, however, being always engaged in devotional service, does
not risk losing his senses to some other engagement. This is a better way of
controlling the senses than by the astahga—yoga.

TEXT 29
WWWMI
wmwmmum

bhoktc‘wam yajﬁa—tapasc‘tm
sarva-loka—mahes’varam

suhrdam sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm

jﬁc‘ttvc‘t mam s’c‘mtim chhati

SYNONYMS

bhoktc‘wam—the beneficiary; yajﬁa—of sacrifices; tapasc'tm—and penances and
austerities; sarva-loka—of all planets and the demigods thereof;
mahc‘I—is’varam—the Supreme Lord; su—hrdam—the benefactor; sarva—of all;
bhﬁtc'mc'tm—the living entities; jﬁc‘ttvc‘t—thus knowing; mam—Me (Lord
Krsna); s’c'mtim—relief from material pangs; chhati—one achieves.

TRANSLATION
A person in full consciousness of Me, knowing Me to be the ultimate



beneficiary of all sacrifices and austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and
demigods, and the benefactor and well-Wisher of all living entities, attains peace
from the pangs of material miseries.

PURPORT

The conditioned souls within the clutches of illusory energy are all anxious
to attain peace in the material world. But they do not know the formula for
peace, which is explained in this part of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The greatest peace
formula is simply this: Lord Krsna is the beneficiary in all human activities.
Men should offer everything to the transcendental service of the Lord because
He is the proprietor of all planets and the demigods thereon. No one is greater
than He. He is greater than the greatest of the demigods, Lord Siva and Lord
Brahma. In the Vedas (gvetéivatara Upam'saa 6.7) the Supreme Lord is
described as tam is’varc‘mc‘tm paramam mahes’varam. Under the spell of illusion,
living entities are trying to be lords of all they survey, but actually they are
dominated by the material energy of the Lord. The Lord is the master of
material nature, and the conditioned souls are under the stringent rules of
material nature. Unless one understands these bare facts, it is not possible to
achieve peace in the world either individually or collectively. This is the sense
of Krsna consciousness: Lord Krsna is the supreme predominator, and all living
entities, including the great demigods, are His subordinates. One can attain
perfect peace only in complete Krsna consciousness.

This Fifth Chapter is a practical explanation of Krsna consciousness,
generally known as karma-yoga. The question of mental speculation as to how
karma-yoga can give liberation is answered herewith. To work in Krsna
consciousness is to work with the complete knowledge of the Lord as the
predominator. Such work is not different from transcendental knowledge.
Direct Krsna consciousness is bhakti-yoga, and jﬁc‘ma-yoga is a path leading to
bhakti-yoga. Krsna consciousness means to work in full knowledge of one’s
relationship with the Supreme Absolute, and the perfection of this
consciousness is full knowledge of Krsna, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. A pure soul is the eternal servant of God as His fragmental part and



parcel. He comes into contact with mciyc't (illusion) due to the desire to lord it
over mciyc't, and that is the cause of his many sufferings. As long as he is in
contact with matter, he has to execute work in terms of material necessities.
Krsna consciousness, however, brings one into spiritual life even while one is
within the jurisdiction of matter, for it is an arousing of spiritual existence by
practice in the material world. The more one is advanced, the more he is freed
from the clutches of matter. The Lord is not partial toward anyone. Everything
depends on one’s practical performance of duties in Krsna consciousness,
which helps one control the senses in every respect and conquer the inﬂuence
of desire and anger. And one who stands fast in Krsna consciousness,
controlling the abovementioned passions, remains factually in the
transcendental stage, or brahma—hirvc‘ma. The eightfold yoga mysticism is
automatically practiced in Krsna consciousness because the ultimate purpose is
served. There is a gradual process of elevation in the practice of yama, hiyama,
ciscma, prahayc‘tma, pratyc‘thc‘tra, dhc‘trahc‘t, dhyc‘ma and samadhi. But these only
preface perfection by devotional service, which alone can award peace to the
human being. It is the highest perfection of life.

Thus end the Bhaktivedahta Purports to the F ifth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Karma—yoga, or Action in Krsha Consciousness.

 

Dhyana-yoga

TEXT 1

W



W:W$ﬁatﬁwtﬁrm|
HWHWHHWWHHII

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
ancis’ritah karma—phalam
karyam karma karoti yah
sa scmnyc‘tsi ca yogi ca
ha hiragm'r ha cdkriyah

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Lord said; ancis’ritah—without taking shelter;
karma—phalam—of the result of work; karyam—obligatory; karma—work;
karoti—performs; yah—one who; sah—he; sannyc‘tsi—in the renounced order;
ca—also; yogi—mystic; ca—also; ha—not; m'h—without; agm'h—fire;
ha—nor; ca—also; akriyah—without duty.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One Who is unattached to the
fruits of his work and Who works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of
life, and he is the true mystic, not he Who lights no fire and performs no duty.

PURPORT

In this chapter the Lord explains that the process of the eightfold yoga
system is a means to control the mind and the senses. However, this is very
difficult for people in general to perform, especially in the Age of Kali.
Although the eightfold yoga system is recommended in this chapter, the Lord
emphasizes that the process of karma-yoga, or acting in Krsna consciousness, is
better. Everyone acts in this world to maintain his family and their
paraphernalia, but no one is working without some self-interest, some personal
gratification, be it concentrated or extended. The criterion of perfection is to
act in Krsna consciousness, and not with a View to enjoying the fruits of work.



To act in Krsna consciousness is the duty of every living entity because all are
constitutionally parts and parcels of the Supreme. The parts of the body work
for the satisfaction of the whole body. The limbs of the body do not act for
self-satisfaction but for the satisfaction of the complete whole. Similarly, the
living entity who acts for satisfaction of the supreme whole and not for
personal satisfaction is the perfect sannyc‘tsi, the perfect yogi.

The scmnyc'tsis sometimes artificially think that they have become liberated
from all material duties, and therefore they cease to perform agm'hotm yajﬁas
(fire sacrifices), but actually they are self-interested because their goal is to
become one with the impersonal Brahman. Such a desire is greater than any
material desire, but it is not without self-interest. Similarly, the mystic yogi
who practices the yoga system with half-open eyes, ceasing all material
activities, desires some satisfaction for his personal self. But a person acting in
Krsna consciousness works for the satisfaction of the whole, without
self-interest. A Krsna conscious person has no desire for self-satisfaction. His
criterion of success is the satisfaction of Krsna, and thus he is the perfect
scmnyc'tsi, or perfect yogi. Lord Caitanya, the highest perfectional symbol of
renunciation, prays in this way:

ha dhaham ha jcmam ha sundarim
kavitc‘tm vc‘t jagad—is’a kamaye
mama jahmcmi jahmahis’vare
bhavatc‘td bhaktir ahaituki tvayi

“O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to enjoy
beautiful women. Nor do I want any number of followers. What I want only is
the causeless mercy of Your devotional service in my life, birth after birth.”

TEXT 2
dWﬁWﬁﬁﬁWI
HWWWWHIIQII

yam sannyc‘tsam iti prc‘thm



yogam tam viddhi pc‘mdava
ha hy asahhyasta—sahkalpo
yogi bhavati kas’ccma

SYNONYMS

yam—what; sannyc‘tsam—renunciation; iti—thus; prc‘thuh—they say;
yogam—linking with the Supreme; tam—that; Uiddhi—you must know;
pandava—O son of Pandu; ha—never; hi—certainly; asannyasta—without
giving up; sahkalpah—desire for self-satisfaction; yogi—a mystic
transcendentalist; bhavati—becomes; kas’ccma—anyone.

TRANSLATION

What is called renunciation you should know to be the same as yoga, or
linking oneself With the Supreme, 0 son of Pandu, for one can never become a
yogi unless he renounces the desire for sense gratification.

PURPORT

Real sannyc‘tsa—yoga or bhakti means that one should know his constitutional
position as the living entity, and act accordingly. The living entity has no
separate independent identity. He is the marginal energy of the Supreme.
When he is entrapped by material energy, he is conditioned, and when he is
Krsna conscious, or aware of the spiritual energy, then he is in his real and
natural state of life. Therefore, when one is in complete knowledge, one ceases
all material sense gratification, or renounces all kinds of sense gratificatory
activities. This is practiced by the yogis who restrain the senses from material
attachment. But a person in Krsna consciousness has no opportunity to engage
his senses in anything which is not for the purpose of Krsna. Therefore, a
Krsna conscious person is simultaneously a sannyc‘tsi and a yogi. The purpose of
knowledge and of restraining the senses, as prescribed in the jﬁc‘ma and yoga
processes, is automatically served in Krsna consciousness. If one is unable to
give up the activities of his selfish nature, then jﬁc‘ma and yoga are of no avail.



The real aim is for a living entity to give up all selfish satisfaction and to be
prepared to satisfy the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person has no desire for
any kind of self-enjoyment. He is always engaged for the enjoyment of the
Supreme. One who has no information of the Supreme must therefore be
engaged in self-satisfaction, because no one can stand on the platform of
inactivity. All purposes are perfectly served by the practice of Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 3

31123—5 ’ WI
Wﬁamzwmaﬁuau

aruruksor muner yogam
karma karaham ucyate
yogc‘wﬁdhasya tasyaiva

s’amah karaham ucyate

SYNONYMS

arumksoh—who has just begun yoga; muheh—of the sage; yogam—the
eightfold yoga system; karma—work; karaham—the means; ucyate—is said to
be; yoga—eightfold yoga; arudhasya—of one who has attained; tasya—his;
eva—certainly; s’amah—cessation of all material activities; karaham—the
means; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

For one Who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to be
the means; and for one Who is already elevated in yoga, cessation of all material
activities is said to be the means.

PURPORT



The process of linking oneself with the Supreme is called yoga. It may be
compared to a ladder for attaining the topmost spiritual realization. This
ladder begins from the lowest material condition of the living entity and rises
up to perfect self-realization in pure spiritual life. According to various
elevations, different parts of the ladder are known by different names. But all
in all, the complete ladder is called yoga and may be divided into three parts,
namely jﬁc‘ma—yoga, dhyc‘ma—yoga and bhakti—yoga. The beginning of the ladder
is called the yogammksu stage, and the highest rung is called yogc‘wﬁdha.

Concerning the eightfold yoga system, attempts in the beginning to enter
into meditation through regulative principles of life and practice of different
sitting postures (which are more or less bodily exercises) are considered
fruitive material activities. All such activities lead to achieving perfect mental
equilibrium to control the senses. When one is accomplished in the practice of
meditation, he ceases all disturbing mental activities.

A Krsna conscious person, however, is situated from the beginning on the
platform of meditation because he always thinks of Krsna. And, being
constantly engaged in the service of Krsna, he is considered to have ceased all
material activities.

TEXT 4

WiﬁﬁﬁdﬂiﬁgﬁﬁaﬁwﬁI
WWIIBII

yada hi hendriyc‘wthesu

ha karmasv anusajjate
sarva-sahkalpa—sannyc‘tsi

yogc‘wﬁdhas tadocyate

SYNONYMS

yada—when; hi—certainly; ha—not; ihdriya—arthesu—in sense gratification;
ha—never; karmasu—in fruitive activities; anusajjate—one necessarily



engages; sarva-sahkalpa—of all material desires; sannyc‘tsi—renouncer;
yoga-c‘tmdhah—elevated in yoga; tadc‘t—at that time; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

A person is said to be elevated in yoga When, having renounced all material
desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engages in fruitive activities.

PURPORT

When a person is fully engaged in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord, he is pleased in himself, and thus he is no longer engaged in sense
gratification or in fruitive activities. Otherwise, one must be engaged in sense
gratification, since one cannot live without engagement. Without Krsna
consciousness, one must be always seeking self-centered or extended selfish
activities. But a Krsna conscious person can do everything for the satisfaction
of Krsna and thereby be perfectly detached from sense gratification. One who
has no such realization must mechanically try to escape material desires before
being elevated to the top rung of the yoga ladder.

TEXT 5
WWI
WWWWWKII

uddhared citmam‘ttmciham
hatmc‘mam avasc‘tdayet
citmaiva hy citmcmo bahdhm
citmaiva ripm dtmcmah

SYNONYMS

uddharet—one must deliver; citmahc‘t—by the mind; citmc‘mam—the
conditioned soul; ha—never; citmc'mam—the conditioned soul;



avasc‘tdayet—put into degradation; citmc‘I—mind; eva—certainly; hi—indeed;
citmahah—of the conditioned soul; bahdhuh—friend; citmc‘I—mind;
eva—certainly; ripuh—enemy; citmahah—of the conditioned soul.

TRANSLATION

One must deliver himself With the help of his mind, and not degrade himself.
The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.

PURPORT

The word citmc't denotes body, mind and soul—depending upon different
circumstances. In the yoga system, the mind and the conditioned soul are
especially important. Since the mind is the central point of yoga practice, citmc't
refers here to the mind. The purpose of the yoga system is to control the mind
and to draw it away from attachment to sense objects. It is stressed herein that
the mind must be so trained that it can deliver the conditioned soul from the
mire of nescience. In material existence one is subjected to the influence of
the mind and the senses. In fact, the pure soul is entangled in the material
world because the mind is involved with the false ego, which desires to lord it
over material nature. Therefore, the mind should be trained so that it will not
be attracted by the glitter of material nature, and in this way the conditioned
soul may be saved. One should not degrade oneself by attraction to sense
objects. The more one is attracted by sense objects, the more one becomes
entangled in material existence. The best way to disentangle oneself is to
always engage the mind in Krsna consciousness. The word hi is used for
emphasizing this point, i.e., that one must do this. It is also said:

mama eva manusyc‘mc‘tm
karaham bahdha—moksayoh

bahdhc‘tya visaydsahgo
muktyai hirvisayam mahah

“For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of liberation.
Mind absorbed in sense objects is the cause of bondage, and mind detached



from the sense objects is the cause of liberation.” (Amrta-bindu Upam'saa 2)
Therefore, the mind which is always engaged in Krsna consciousness is the
cause of supreme liberation.

TEXT 6

WWW
maﬁaﬁaﬁamuau

bahdhm citmc‘ttmahas tasya
yem‘ttmaivc‘ttmam‘t jitah
cmatmahas tu s’atrutve
vartetc‘ttmaiva s’atru—vat

SYNONYMS

bahdhuh—friend; dtmc‘I—the mind; citmahah—of the living entity; tasya—of
him; yeha—by whom; dtmc‘I—the mind; eva—certainly; citmahc‘t—by the living
entity; jitah—conquered; amitmcmah—of one who has failed to control the
mind; tu—but; s’atmtve—because of enmity; varteta—remains; citmc‘t eva—the
very mind; s’atru—vat—as an enemy.

TRANSLATION

For him Who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends; but for
one Who has failed to do so, his mind Will remain the greatest enemy.

PURPORT

The purpose of practicing eightfold yoga is to control the mind in order to
make it a friend in discharging the human mission. Unless the mind is
controlled, the practice of yoga (for show) is simply a waste of time. One who
cannot control his mind lives always with the greatest enemy, and thus his life
and its mission are spoiled. The constitutional position of the living entity is to



carry out the order of the superior. As long as one’s mind remains an
unconquered enemy, one has to serve the dictations of lust, anger, avarice,
illusion, etc. But when the mind is conquered, one voluntarily agrees to abide
by the dictation of the Personality of Godhead, who is situated within the
heart of everyone as Paramatma. Real yoga practice entails meeting the
Paramatma within the heart and then following His dictation. For one who
takes to Krsna consciousness directly, perfect surrender to the dictation of the
Lord follows automatically.

TEXT 7

m:nmwwmamﬁazl
Wzﬁg EMT WW: II L9 ||

jitc‘ttmahah pras’c‘mtasya
paramatmc‘t samahitah
s’itosha—sukha—duhkhesu
tathd mdm‘tpamc‘mayoh

SYNONYMS

jita—c‘ttmahah—of one who has conquered his mind; pras’c‘mtasya—who has
attained tranquillity by such control over the mind; parama-c‘ttmc‘t—the
Supersoul; samc‘thitah—approached completely; s’ita—in cold; usha—heat;
sukha—happiness; duhkhesu—and distress; tathc‘I—also; mc‘ma—in honor;
apamc‘mayoh—and dishonor.

TRANSLATION

For one Who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached, for
he has attained tranquillity. To such a man happiness and distress, heat and
cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.

PURPORT



Actually, every living entity is intended to abide by the dictation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated in everyone’s heart as
Paramatma. When the mind is misled by the external, illusory energy, one
becomes entangled in material activities. Therefore, as soon as one’s mind is
controlled through one of the yoga systems, one should be considered to have
already reached the destination. One has to abide by superior dictation. When
one’s mind is fixed on the superior nature, he has no alternative but to follow
the dictation of the Supreme. The mind must admit some superior dictation
and follow it. The effect of controlling the mind is that one automatically
follows the dictation of the Paramatma, or Supersoul. Because this
transcendental position is at once achieved by one who is in Krsna
consciousness, the devotee of the Lord is unaffected by the dualities of
material existence, namely distress and happiness, cold and heat, etc. This
state is practical samadhi, or absorption in the Supreme.

TEXT 8

WWWWWWH
wswﬁwmgmaﬁzuw

jhaha—vijﬁc‘ma-trptc‘ttmc‘t
kIth—stho vijitehdriyah
yukta ity ucyate yogi
sama—lostrc‘ts’ma—kc‘tﬁcahah

SYNONYMS

jﬁc‘ma—by acquired knowledge; Uijﬁc'ma—and realized knowledge;
trpta—satisfied; citmc't—a living entity; kata-sthah—spiritually situated;
Uijita-ihdriyah—sensually controlled; yuktah—competent for self-realization;
iti—thus; ucyate—is said; yogi—a mystic; sama—equipoised; lostra—pebbles;
as’ma—stone; kaﬁcahah—gold.



TRANSLATION

A person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a yogi [or
mystic] When he is fully satisfied by Virtue of acquired knowledge and
realization. Such a person is situated in transcendence and is self-controlled. He
sees everything—Whether it be pebbles, stones or gold—as the same.

PURPORT

Book knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is useless. This is
stated as follows:

atah s’ri-krsha—m‘tmc‘tdi
ha bhaved grahyam ihdriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvc‘tdau
svayam eva sphmaty adah

“No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form,
quality and pastimes of Sri Krsna through his materially contaminated senses.
Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the
Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality and pastimes of the Lord
revealed to him.” (Bbakti—rasémrta-smdbu 1.2.234)

This Bhagavad-gitc‘t is the science of Krsna consciousness. No one can
become Krsna conscious simply by mundane scholarship. One must be
fortunate enough to associate with a person who is in pure consciousness. A
Krsna conscious person has realized knowledge, by the grace of Krsna, because
he is satisfied with pure devotional service. By realized knowledge, one
becomes perfect. By transcendental knowledge one can remain steady in his
convictions, but by mere academic knowledge one can be easily deluded and
confused by apparent contradictions. It is the realized soul who is actually
self-controlled, because he is surrendered to Krsna. He is transcendental
because he has nothing to do with mundane scholarship. For him mundane
scholarship and mental speculation, which may be as good as gold to others, are
of no greater value than pebbles or stones.



TEXT 9

QSIEHEIIQEIHIHHWRJQGQEI'QQ I
BTW a Wm WW II 2 ||
suhm—mitrc‘wy-udc‘tsiha—
madhyastha—dvesya—bahdhusu

sadhusv api ca papesu
sama—buddhir vis’isyate

SYNONYMS

su-hTt—to well-wishers by nature; mitTa—benefactors with affection;
aTi—enemies; udasiha—neutrals between belligerents;
madhya—stha—mediators between belligerents; dvesya—the envious;
bahdhusu—and the relatives or well-wishers; sadhusu—unto the pious; api—as
well as; ca—and; papesu—unto the sinners; sama—buddhih—having equal
intelligence; Uis’isyate—is far advanced.

TRANSLATION

A person is considered still further advanced When he regards honest
well-Wishers, affectionate benefactors, the neutral, mediators, the envious,
friends and enemies, the pious and the sinners all With an equal mind.

TEXT 10

WWWWWN
WWW: || 9o ||

yogi yuﬁjita satatam
citmc‘mam rahasi sthitah



ekc‘tki yata—cittc‘ttmc‘t
hirc‘ts’ir aparigrahah

SYNONYMS

yogi—a transcendentalist; yuﬁjita—must concentrate in Krsna consciousness;
satatam—constantly; citmc‘mam—himself (by body, mind and self); rahasi—in
a secluded place; sthitah—being situated; ekc‘tki—alone;
yata-Citta-c'ttmc't—always careful in mind; hirc'ts’ih—without being attracted by
anything else; aparigmhah—free from the feeling of possessiveness.

TRANSLATION

A transcendentalist should always engage his body, mind and self in
relationship With the Supreme; he should live alone in a secluded place and
should always carefully control his mind. He should be free from desires and
feelings of possessiveness.

PURPORT

Krsna is realized in different degrees as Brahman, Paramatma and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna consciousness means, concisely, to be
always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. But those
who are attached to the impersonal Brahman or the localized Supersoul are
also partially Krsna conscious, because impersonal Brahman is the spiritual ray
of Krsna and Supersoul is the all-pervading partial expansion of Krsna. Thus
the impersonalist and the meditator are also indirectly Krsna conscious. A
directly Krsna conscious person is the topmost transcendentalist because such
a devotee knows what is meant by Brahman and Paramatma. His knowledge of
the Absolute Truth is perfect, whereas the impersonalist and the meditative
yogi are imperfectly Krsna conscious.

Nevertheless, all of these are instructed herewith to be constantly engaged
in their particular pursuits so that they may come to the highest perfection
sooner or later. The first business of a transcendentalist is to keep the mind



always on Krsna. One should always think of Krsna and not forget Him even
for a moment. Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is called samadhi, or
trance. In order to concentrate the mind, one should always remain in
seclusion and avoid disturbance by external objects. He should be very careful
to accept favorable and reject unfavorable conditions that affect his
realization. And, in perfect determination, he should not hanker after
unnecessary material things that entangle him by feelings of possessiveness.

All these perfections and precautions are perfectly executed when one is
directly in Krsna consciousness, because direct Krsna consciousness means
self-abnegation, wherein there is very little chance for material possessiveness.
Srila Rfipa Gosvami characterizes Krsna consciousness in this way:

ahasaktasya visayc‘m
yathc‘trham upayuﬁjatah
hirbahdhah krsha—sambahdhe
yuktam vairc‘tgyam ucyate

prc‘tpaﬁcikatayc‘t buddhyc‘t
hari—sambahdhi—vastuhah

mumuksubhih parityc‘tgo
vairc‘tgyam phalgu kathyate

“When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts
everything in relation to Krsna, one is rightly situated above possessiveness.
On the other hand, one who rejects everything without knowledge of its
relationship to Krsna is not as complete in his renunciation.”
(Bbakti-rasémrta-smdbu 2.255—256)

A Krsna conscious person well knows that everything belongs to Krsna, and
thus he is always free from feelings of personal possession. As such, he has no
hankering for anything on his own personal account. He knows how to accept
things in favor of Krsna consciousness and how to reject things unfavorable to
Krsna consciousness. He is always aloof from material things because he is
always transcendental, and he is always alone, having nothing to do with
persons not in Krsna consciousness. Therefore a person in Krsna consciousness
is the perfect yogi.



TEXTS 11—12

ﬁﬁqﬁsmﬁammﬁmn

WWW" 99 ||
Hamamwwﬁlﬁﬁaﬂmzl

39W WW II ‘2? ||

s’ucau des’e pratisthc‘tpya
sthiram ciscmam dtmcmah
haty—ucchritam miti—hicam
cailc‘tjiha—kus’ottamm

tatraikdgram mahah krtvd
yata—cittehdriya—kriyah
upavis’yc‘tsahe yuﬁjyc‘td
yogam citma—vis’uddhaye

SYNONYMS

s’ucau—in a sanctified; des’e—land; pratisthc‘tpya—placing; sthiram—firm;
ciscmam—seat; citmcmah—his own; ha—not; ati—too; ucchritam—high;
ha—nor; ati—too; hicam—low; caila—ajiha—of soft cloth and deerskin;
kus’a—and kus’a grass; uttaram—covering; tatra—thereupon; eka—agram—with
one attention; mahah—mind; krtvc‘t—making; yata—citta—controlling the
mind; ihdriya—senses; kriyah—and activities; upavis’ya—sitting; ciscme—on
the seat; yuhjyc‘tt—should execute; yogam—yoga practice; dtma—the heart;
Uis’uddhaye—for clarifying.

TRANSLATION

To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kus’a grass
on the ground and then cover it With a deerskin and a soft cloth. The seat
should be neither too high nor too low and should be situated in a sacred place.



The yogi should then sit on it very firmly and practice yoga to purify the heart
by controlling his mind, senses and activities and fixing the mind on one point.

PURPORT

“Sacred place” refers to places of pilgrimage. In India the yogis, the
transcendentalists or the devotees, all leave home and reside in sacred places
such as Prayaga, Mathura, Vrndavana, Hrsikes’a and Hardwar and in solitude
practice yoga where the sacred rivers like the Yamuna and the Ganges ﬂow.
But often this is not possible, especially for Westerners. The so-called yoga
societies in big cities may be successful in earning material benefit, but they
are not at all suitable for the actual practice of yoga. One who is not
self-controlled and whose mind is not undisturbed cannot practice meditation.
Therefore, in the Brhah—hc‘tradiya Puraha it is said that in Kali-yuga (the
present yuga, or age), when people in general are short-lived, slow in spiritual
realization and always disturbed by various anxieties, the best means of
spiritual realization is chanting the holy name of the Lord.

hater hama hater hama

hater hamaiva kevalam
kalau misty eva misty eva
misty eva gatir anyathc‘t

[Adi 17.21]

“In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no other
way. There is no other way.”

TEXTS 13—14
an' W W 199:: I
@931 mm a WWII 93 H
mm mm fem: I



n:nahmtriﬁa‘iaesam‘iawuneu

samam kaya—s’iro—grivam
dhc‘trayahh acalam sthirah
sampreksya misikc‘tgram svam
dis’as’ cc‘mavalokayah

pras’c‘mtc‘ttmc‘t vigata—bhir
brahmacc‘tri—wate sthitah
manah samyamya mac—citto
yukta asita mat—parah

SYNONYMS

samam—straight; kaya—body; s’irah—head; grivam—and neck;
dhdraycm—holding; acalam—unmoving; sthirah—still; sampreksya—looking;
hasikc‘t—of the nose; agram—at the tip; svam—own; dis’ah—on all sides;
ca—also; ahavalokayah—not looking; pras’c‘mta—unagitated; citmc‘I—mind;
vigata—bhih—devoid of fear; brahmacc‘wi-wate—in the vow of celibacy;
sthitah—situated; mahah—mind; samyamya—completely subduing;
mat—upon Me (Krsna); Cittah—concentrating the mind; yuktah—the actual
yogi; asita—should sit; mat—Me; parah—the ultimate goal.

TRANSLATION

One should hold one’s body, neck and head erect in a straight line and stare
steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, With an unagitated, subdued mind, devoid
of fear, completely free from seX life, one should meditate upon Me Within the
heart and make Me the ultimate goal of life.

PURPORT

The goal of life is to know Krsna, who is situated within the heart of every
living being as Paramatma, the four-handed Visnu form. The yoga process is
practiced in order to discover and see this localized form of Visnu, and not for



any other purpose. The localized Uishu-mmti is the plenary representation of
Krsna dwelling within one’s heart. One who has no program to realize this
Uishu-mmti is uselessly engaged in mock yoga practice and is certainly wasting
his time. Krsna is the ultimate goal of life, and the Uishu-mmti situated in one’s
heart is the object of yoga practice. To realize this Uishu-mmti within the heart,
one has to observe complete abstinence from sex life; therefore one has to
leave home and live alone in a secluded place, remaining seated as mentioned
above. One cannot enjoy sex life daily at home or elsewhere and attend a
so-called yoga class and thus become a yogi. One has to practice controlling the
mind and avoiding all kinds of sense gratification, of which sex life is the chief.
In the rules of celibacy written by the great sage Yajﬁavalkya it is said:

karmahc‘t mahasc‘t vc‘tcc‘t

sarvc‘wasthc‘tsu sarvada
sarvatra maithuna—tyc‘tgo
brahmacaryam pracaksate

“The vow of brahmacarya is meant to help one completely abstain from sex
indulgence in work, words and mind—at all times, under all circumstances,
and in all places.” No one can perform correct yoga practice through sex
indulgence. Bmhmacarya is taught, therefore, from childhood, when one has
no knowledge of sex life. Children at the age of five are sent to the gum-kula,
or the place of the spiritual master, and the master trains the young boys in the
strict discipline of becoming brahmacc‘wis. Without such practice, no one can
make advancement in any yoga, whether it be dhyc‘ma, jhc‘ma or bhakti. One
who, however, follows the rules and regulations of married life, having a sexual
relationship only with his wife (and that also under regulation), is also called a
brahmacc‘tri. Such a restrained householder brahmacc‘m may be accepted in the
bhakti school, but the jﬁc‘ma and dhyc'ma schools do not even admit householder
brahmacc‘n‘is. They require complete abstinence without compromise. In the
bhakti school, a householder brahmacc‘tri is allowed controlled sex life because
the cult of bhakti-yoga is so powerful that one automatically loses sexual
attraction, being engaged in the superior service of the Lord. In the

Bbagavad—gité (2.59) it is said:



visayc‘t vihivartcmte
hirc‘thc‘wasya dehihah
rasa—varjam raso ’py asya
param drstvc‘t m'vartate

Whereas others are forced to restrain themselves from sense gratification, a
devotee of the Lord automatically refrains because of superior taste. Other
than the devotee, no one has any information of that superior taste.

Vigata-bhih. One cannot be fearless unless one is fully in Krsna
consciousness. A conditioned soul is fearful due to his perverted memory, his
forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. The Bhagavatam (11.2.37)
says, bhayam dvitiyc‘tbhihives’atah syc‘td is’c‘td apetasya viparyayo ’smrtih. Krsna
consciousness is the only basis for fearlessness. Therefore, perfect practice is
possible for a person who is Krsna conscious. And since the ultimate goal of
yoga practice is to see the Lord within, a Krsna conscious person is already the
best of all yogis. The principles of the yoga system mentioned herein are
different from those of the popular so-called yoga societies.

TEXT 15

WWWWWN
mﬁﬁﬁwmmmwﬁruwu

yuﬁjahh evam sadatmciham
yogi hiyata—mc‘masah
s’c‘mtim nirvaha—paramdm
mat—samsthcim adhigacchati

SYNONYMS

yuﬁjah—practicing; evam—as mentioned above; sadc't—constantly;
citmc'mam—body, mind and soul; yogi—the mystic transcendentalist;
hiyata-mc‘masah—with a regulated mind; s’c‘mtim—peace;
nirvaha—pammc‘tm—cessation of material existence; mat-samsthcim—the



spiritual sky (the kingdom of God); adhigacchati—does attain.

TRANSLATION

Thus practicing constant control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic
transcendentalist, his mind regulated, attains to the kingdom of God [or the
abode of Krsna] by cessation of material existence.

PURPORT

The ultimate goal in practicing yoga is now clearly explained. Yoga practice
is not meant for attaining any kind of material facility; it is to enable the
cessation of all material existence. One who seeks an improvement in health
or aspires after material perfection is no yogi according to Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Nor
does cessation of material existence entail one’s entering into “the void,”
which is only a myth. There is no void anywhere within the creation of the
Lord. Rather, the cessation of material existence enables one to enter into the
spiritual sky, the abode of the Lord. The abode of the Lord is also clearly
described in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t as that place where there is no need of sun,
moon or electricity. All the planets in the spiritual kingdom are
self-illuminated like the sun in the material sky. The kingdom of God is
everywhere, but the spiritual sky and the planets thereof are called pamm
dhc‘tma, or superior abodes.

A consummate yogi, who is perfect in understanding Lord Krsna, as is
clearly stated herein by the Lord Himself (mat—cittah, mat—parah,
mat-sthc'mam), can attain real peace and can ultimately reach His supreme
abode, Krsnaloka, known as Goloka Vrndavana. In the Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.37)
it is clearly stated, goloka eva m'vasaty akhilc‘ttma—bhﬁtah: the Lord, although
residing always in His abode called Goloka, is the all-pervading Brahman and
the localized Paramatma as well by dint of His superior spiritual energies. No
one can reach the spiritual sky (Vaikuntha) or enter into the Lord’s eternal
abode (Goloka Vrndavana) without the proper understanding of Krsna and
His plenary expansion Visnu. Therefore a person working in Krsna
consciousness is the perfect yogi, because his mind is always absorbed in



Krsna’s activities (sa vai mahah krsha—padaravihdayoh). In the Vedas also
(§Vetés’vatara Upam'saa 3.8) we learn, tam eva Uiditvc‘tti mrtyum eti: “One can
overcome the path of birth and death only by understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna.” In other words, perfection of the yoga system
is the attainment of freedom from material existence and not some magical
jugglery or gymnastic feats to befool innocent people.

TEXT 16

waaaﬁhﬁﬁeﬁﬁaﬁlwaan
Hammamﬁaaﬁmnau

haty—as’hatas ’tu yogo ’sti

ha caikc‘mtam ahas’hatah
ha cc‘tti-svapha—s’ilasya
jagrato haiva cc‘trjuha

SYNONYMS

ha—never; ati—too much; as’hatah—of one who eats; tu—but; yogah—linking
with the Supreme; asti—there is; ha—nor; ca—also; ekc‘mtam—overly;
ahas’hatah—abstaining from eating; ha—nor; ca—also; ati—too much;
svapha—s’ilasya—of one who sleeps; jagratah—or one who keeps night watch
too much; ha—not; eva—ever; ca—and; arjuha—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

There is no possibility of one’s becoming a yogi, O Arjuna, if one eats too
much or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough.

PURPORT

Regulation of diet and sleep is recommended herein for the yogis. Too much
eating means eating more than is required to keep the body and soul together.



There is no need for men to eat animals, because there is an ample supply of
grains, vegetables, fruits and milk. Such simple foodstuff is considered to be in
the mode of goodness according to the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Animal food is for those
in the mode of ignorance. Therefore, those who indulge in animal food,
drinking, smoking and eating food which is not first offered to Krsna will
suffer sinful reactions because of eating only polluted things. Bhuﬁjate te tv
agham papa ye paccmty citma—kcirahc‘tt. Anyone who eats for sense pleasure, or
cooks for himself, not offering his food to Krsna, eats only sin. One who eats
sin and eats more than is allotted to him cannot execute perfect yoga. It is best
that one eat only the remnants of foodstuff offered to Krsna. A person in
Krsna consciousness does not eat anything which is not first offered to Krsna.
Therefore, only the Krsna conscious person can attain perfection in yoga
practice. Nor can one who artificially abstains from eating, manufacturing his
own personal process of fasting, practice yoga. The Krsna conscious person
observes fasting as it is recommended in the scriptures. He does not fast or eat
more than is required, and he is thus competent to perform yoga practice. One
who eats more than required will dream very much while sleeping, and he must
consequently sleep more than is required. One should not sleep more than six
hours daily. One who sleeps more than six hours out of twenty-four is certainly
influenced by the mode of ignorance. A person in the mode of ignorance is
lazy and prone to sleep a great deal. Such a person cannot perform yoga.

TEXT 17

WWWI
Wﬁiﬁmﬁgzmumu

yuktc‘thc‘tra—vihdrasya
yukta—cestasya karmasu
yukta-svaphc‘wabodhasya
yogo bhavati duhkha—hc‘t



SYNONYMS

yukta—regulated; ahara—eating; vihc‘trasya—recreation; yukta—regulated;
cestasya—of one who works for maintenance; karmasu—in discharging duties;
yukta—regulated; svapha—avabodhasya—sleep and wakefulness;
yogah—practice of yoga; bhavati—becomes; duhkha-hc‘t—diminishing pains.

TRANSLATION

He Who is regulated in his habits of eating, sleeping, recreation and work can
mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga system.

PURPORT

Extravagance in the matter of eating, sleeping, defending and
mating—which are demands of the body—can block advancement in the
practice of yoga. As far as eating is concerned, it can be regulated only when
one is practiced to take and accept prasc‘tdam, sanctified food. Lord Krsna is
offered, according to the Bbagavad—gité (9.26), vegetables, flowers, fruits,
grains, milk, etc. In this way, a person in Krsna consciousness becomes
automatically trained not to accept food not meant for human consumption,
or not in the category of goodness. As far as sleeping is concerned, a Krsna
conscious person is always alert in the discharge of his duties in Krsna
consciousness, and therefore any unnecessary time spent sleeping is considered
a great loss. Avyartha-kalawam: [Cc.Madhya 2318-19] a Krsna conscious
person cannot bear to pass a minute of his life without being engaged in the
service of the Lord. Therefore, his sleeping is kept to a minimum. His ideal in
this respect is Srila Rfipa Gosvami, who was always engaged in the service of
Krsna and who could not sleep more than two hours a day, and sometimes not
even that. Thakura Haridasa would not even accept prasc‘tdam nor even sleep
for a moment without finishing his daily routine of chanting with his beads
three hundred thousand names. As far as work is concerned, a Krsna conscious
person does not do anything which is not connected with Krsna’s interest, and



thus his work is always regulated and is untainted by sense gratification. Since
there is no question of sense gratification, there is no material leisure for a
person in Krsna consciousness. And because he is regulated in all his work,
speech, sleep, wakefulness and all other bodily activities, there is no material
misery for him.

TEXT 18
WWWI
ﬁelezaaimﬁm‘rgﬁssaaﬁamuwu

yada vihiyatam cittam

citmcmy evc‘watisthate
m'sprhah sarva—kc‘tmebhyo

yukta ity ucyate tadc‘t

SYNONYMS

yada—when; vihiyatam—particularly disciplined; cittam—the mind and its
activities; citmcmi—in the transcendence; eva—certainly;
avatisthate—becomes situated; hisprhah—devoid of desire; sarva—for all kinds
of; kamebhyah—material sense gratification; yuktah—well situated in yoga;
iti—thus; ucyate—is said to be; tada—at that time.

TRANSLATION

When the yogi, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities and
becomes situated in transcendence—devoid of all material desires—he is said to
be well established in yoga.

PURPORT

The activities of the yogi are distinguished from those of an ordinary person
by his characteristic cessation from all kinds of material desires—of which sex



is the chief. A perfect yogi is so well disciplined in the activities of the mind
that he can no longer be disturbed by any kind of material desire. This
perfectional stage can automatically be attained by persons in Krsna
consciousness, as stated in the grimad-Bbégavatam (9.4.18—20):

sa vai mahah krsha—pc‘tdamvihdayor
vacamsi vaikuhtha—guhc‘muvamahe
karau hater mandira—mc‘trjam‘tdisu

s’rutim cakc‘tracyuta-sat—kathodaye

mukuhda-lihgc‘tlaya—dars’ahe drs’au
tad—bhrtya—gc‘ttra—spars’e ’hga—sahgamam
ghrc‘mam ca tat—pc‘tda—saroja—samabhe
s’rimat—tulasyd rascmc‘tm tad—arpite

padau hareh ksetra-padahusarpahe
s’iro hrsikes’a-padabhivahdahe
kamam ca dasye ha tu kama—kc‘tmyayc‘t
yathottama—s’loka—jam‘ts’myci ratih

“King Ambarisa first of all engaged his mind on the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna; then, one after another, he engaged his words in describing the
transcendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the temple of the
Lord, his ears in hearing of the activities of the Lord, his eyes in seeing the
transcendental forms of the Lord, his body in touching the bodies of the
devotees, his sense of smell in smelling the scents of the lotus flowers offered to
the Lord, his tongue in tasting the tulasi leaf offered at the lotus feet of the
Lord, his legs in going to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord, his
head in offering obeisances unto the Lord, and his desires in executing the
mission of the Lord. All these transcendental activities are quite befitting a
pure devotee.”

This transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by the followers
of the impersonalist path, but it becomes very easy and practical for a person
in Krsna consciousness, as is apparent in the above description of the
engagements of Maharaja Ambarisa. Unless the mind is fixed on the lotus feet



of the Lord by constant remembrance, such transcendental engagements are
not practical. In the devotional service of the Lord, therefore, these prescribed
activities are called arccma, or engaging all the senses in the service of the
Lord. The senses and the mind require engagements. Simple abnegation is not
practical. Therefore, for people in general—especially those who are not in the
renounced order of life—transcendental engagement of the senses and the
mind as described above is the perfect process for transcendental achievement,
which is called yukta in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

TEXT 19

amaﬁqiﬁameﬁﬁaﬁﬁiweﬁI
wmwmzum

yathc‘t dipo hivc‘Ita—stho
hehgate sopamd smrtc‘t
yogiho yata—cittasya
yuﬁjato yogam citmcmah

SYNONYMS

yathc‘t—as; dipah—a lamp; hivc‘Ita-sthah—in a place without wind; ha—does
not; ihgate—waver; sa—this; upamc‘t—comparison; smrtc‘I—is considered;
yogihah—of the yogi; yata-cittasya—whose mind is controlled;
yuhjatah—constantly engaged; yogam—in meditation; citmahah—on
transcendence.

TRANSLATION

As a lamp in a Windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist,
Whose mind is controlled, remains always steady in his meditation on the
transcendent self.

PURPORT



A truly Krsna conscious person, always absorbed in transcendence, in
constant undisturbed meditation on his worshipable Lord, is as steady as a
lamp in a windless place.

TEXTS 20—23
WWWWI
wﬁammﬁmamﬁqwﬁrlmou
WWI
aﬁaaﬁﬁaWﬁaaaeﬁIEIr—olazuvu
dwwmmmmn
Wﬁgmwmumu
?WWWHWH

yatroparamate cittam
nituddham yoga—sevayc‘t
yatra caivc‘ttmam‘ttmc‘mam
pas’yahh citmcmi tusyati

sukham cityahtikam yat tad

buddhi—grc‘thyam atihdriyam
vetti yatra ha caivc‘tyam
sthitas’ calati tattvatah

yam labdhvc‘t cdparam labham
mahyate nadhikam tatah
yasmih sthito ha duhkheha
guruhc‘tpi vicalyate

tam vidycid duhkha—samyoga—
viyogam yoga-samjhitam



SYNONYMS

yatTa—in that state of affairs where; upammate—cease (because one feels
transcendental happiness); Cittam—mental activities; nituddham—being
restrained from matter; yoga—sevayc‘t—by performance of yoga; yatra—in
which; ca—also; eva—certainly; citmahc‘t—by the pure mind; citmc‘mam—the
self; pas’yah—realizing the position of; citmcmi—in the self; tusyati—one
becomes satisfied; sukham—happiness; cityahtikam—supreme; yat—which;
tat—that; buddhi—by intelligence; grahyam—accessible;
atihdriyam—transcendental; vetti—one knows; yatra—wherein; ha—never;
ca—also; eva—certainly; ayam—he; sthitah—situated; calati—moves;
tattvatah—from the truth; yam—that which; labdhvc‘t—by attainment;
ca—also; aparam—any other; labham—gain; mahyate—considers; ha—never;
adhikam—more; tatah—than that; yasmih—in which; sthitah—being situated;
ha—never; duhkheha—by miseries; guruhc‘t api—even though very difficult;
vicc‘tlyate—becomes shaken; tam—that; vidyc‘tt—you must know;
duhkha-samyoga—of the miseries of material contact;
viyogam—extermination; yoga-samjﬁitam—called trance in yoga.

TRANSLATION

In the stage of perfection called trance, or samadhi, one’s mind is completely
restrained from material mental activities by practice of yoga. This perfection is
characterized by one’s ability to see the self by the pure mind and to relish and
rejoice in the self. In that joyous state, one is situated in boundless
transcendental happiness, realized through transcendental senses. Established
thus, one never departs from the truth, and upon gaining this he thinks there is
no greater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken, even in
the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedom from all miseries
arising from material contact.

PURPORT



By practice of yoga one becomes gradually detached from material concepts.
This is the primary characteristic of the yoga principle. And after this, one
becomes situated in trance, or samadhi, which means that the yogi realizes the
Supersoul through transcendental mind and intelligence, without any of the
misgivings of identifying the self with the Superself. Yoga practice is more or
less based on the principles of the Pataﬁjali system. Some unauthorized
commentators try to identify the individual soul with the Supersoul, and the
monists think this to be liberation, but they do not understand the real
purpose of the Pataﬁjali system of yoga. There is an acceptance of
transcendental pleasure in the Pataﬁjali system, but the monists do not accept
this transcendental pleasure, out of fear of jeopardizing the theory of oneness.
The duality of knowledge and knower is not accepted by the nondualist, but in
this verse transcendental pleasure—realized through transcendental
senses—is accepted. And this is corroborated by Pataﬁjali Muni, the famous
exponent of the yoga system. The great sage declares in his Yoga-sﬁtras (3.34):
purusc‘trtha—s’ﬁnyc‘mc‘tm guhdhc‘tm pratiprasavah kaivalyam svarﬁpa—pratisthc‘t vc‘t
citi—s’aktir iti.

This Citi-sakti, or internal potency, is transcendental. Pumsc‘n‘tha means
material religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and, at the end,
the attempt to become one with the Supreme. This “oneness with the
Supreme” is called kaivalyam by the monist. But according to Pataﬁjali, this
kaivalyam is an internal, or transcendental, potency by which the living entity
becomes aware of his constitutional position. In the words of Lord Caitanya,
this state of affairs is called ceto—darpaha—mc‘wjaham [Cc. Antya 20.12], or
clearance of the impure mirror of the mind. This “clearance” is actually
liberation, or bhava-mahc‘I—davc‘tghi-hirvc‘tpaham. The theory of nirvaha—also
preliminary—corresponds with this principle. In the Bhagavatam (2.10.6) this
is called svarﬁpeha vyavasthitih. The Bhagavad-gitc‘t also confirms this situation
in this verse.

After nirvana, or material cessation, there is the manifestation of spiritual
activities, or devotional service to the Lord, known as Krsna consciousness. In
the words of the Bhagavatam, svarﬁpeha vyavasthitih: this is the “real life of the
living entity.” Maya, or illusion, is the condition of spiritual life contaminated



by material infection. Liberation from this material infection does not mean
destruction of the original eternal position of the living entity. Pataﬁjali also
accepts this by his words kaivalyam svarﬁpa—pratisthc‘t vc‘t citi—s’aktir iti. This
Citi-sakti, or transcendental pleasure, is real life. This is confirmed in the
Vedanta-sﬁtra (1.1.12) as ahahda—mayo ’bhyc‘tsc‘tt. This natural transcendental
pleasure is the ultimate goal of yoga and is easily achieved by execution of
devotional service, or bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga will be vividly described in the
Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

In the yoga system, as described in this chapter, there are two kinds of
samadhi, called samprajﬁc‘tta—samc‘tdhi and asamprajﬁcita—samc‘tdhi. When one
becomes situated in the transcendental position by various philosophical
researches, he is said to have achieved sampmjﬁc'tta-samc‘tdhi. In the
asampmjﬁc‘tta-samc‘tdhi there is no longer any connection with mundane
pleasure, for one is then transcendental to all sorts of happiness derived from
the senses. When the yogi is once situated in that transcendental position, he
is never shaken from it. Unless the yogi is able to reach this position, he is
unsuccessful. Today’s so-called yoga practice, which involves various sense
pleasures, is contradictory. A yogi indulging in sex and intoxication is a
mockery. Even those yogis who are attracted by the siddhis (perfections) in the
process of yoga are not perfectly situated. If yogis are attracted by the
by-products of yoga, then they cannot attain the stage of perfection, as is
stated in this verse. Persons, therefore, indulging in the make-show practice of
gymnastic feats or siddhis should know that the aim of yoga is lost in that way.

The best practice of yoga in this age is Krsna consciousness, which is not
baffling. A Krsna conscious person is so happy in his occupation that he does
not aspire after any other happiness. There are many impediments, especially
in this age of hypocrisy, to practicing hatha—yoga, dhyc‘ma—yoga and jﬁc‘ma-yoga,
but there is no such problem in executing karma—yoga or bhakti—yoga.

As long as the material body exists, one has to meet the demands of the
body, namely eating, sleeping, defending and mating. But a person who is in
pure bhakti-yoga, or in Krsna consciousness, does not arouse the senses while
meeting the demands of the body. Rather, he accepts the bare necessities of
life, making the best use of a bad bargain, and enjoys transcendental happiness



in Krsna consciousness. He is callous toward incidental occurrences—such as
accidents, disease, scarcity and even the death of a most dear relative—but he
is always alert to execute his duties in Krsna consciousness, or bhakti-yoga.
Accidents never deviate him from his duty. As stated in the Bbagavad—gité
(2.14), cigamc‘tpciyiho ’hityc‘ts tc‘m’ts titiksasva bhc‘wata. He endures all such
incidental occurrences because he knows that they come and go and do not
affect his duties. In this way he achieves the highest perfection in yoga
practice.

TEXT 24

Hﬁaﬁﬁﬁiﬁﬁq‘iﬁiﬁSﬁrﬁw—éiaml

WWW
Hﬁﬁaﬁawﬁﬁrﬁumanmnlqeu

sa his’cayeha yoktavyo
yogo ’hirvihha—cetasc‘t
sahkalpa—prabhavc‘m kamams
tyaktvc‘t sarvc‘m as’esatah
mahasaivehdriya—grc‘tmam
vihiyamya samahtatah

SYNONYMS

sah—that; his’cayeha—with firm determination; yoktavyah—must be
practiced; yogah—yoga system; ahirvihha—cetasc‘t—without deviation;
sahkalpa—mental speculations; prabhavc‘m—born of; kamah—material desires;
tyaktvd—giving up; sarvc‘m—all; as’esatah—completely; mahasc‘t—by the mind;
eva—certainly; ihdriya—grc‘tmam—the full set of senses; vihiyamya—regulating;
samahtatah—from all sides.

TRANSLATION

One should engage oneself in the practice of yoga With determination and



faith and not be deviated from the path. One should abandon, Without
exception, all material desires born of mental speculation and thus control all
the senses on all sides by the mind.

PURPORT

The yoga practitioner should be determined and should patiently prosecute
the practice without deviation. One should be sure of success at the end and
pursue this course with great perseverance, not becoming discouraged if there
is any delay in the attainment of success. Success is sure for the rigid
practitioner. Regarding bhakti-yoga, Rfipa Gosvami says:

utsc‘thc‘m his’cayc‘td dhairyc‘tt
tat—tat—karma—pravartam‘tt
sahga—tyc‘tgc‘tt sato vrtteh

sadbhir bhaktih prasidhyati

“One can execute the process of bhakti-yoga successfully with full-hearted
enthusiasm, perseverance, and determination, by following the prescribed
duties in the association of devotees and by engaging completely in activities
of goodness.” (Upadesﬁmrta 3)

As for determination, one should follow the example of the sparrow who
lost her eggs in the waves of the ocean. A sparrow laid her eggs on the shore of
the ocean, but the big ocean carried away the eggs on its waves. The sparrow
became very upset and asked the ocean to return her eggs. The ocean did not
even consider her appeal. 80 the sparrow decided to dry up the ocean. She
began to pick out the water in her small beak, and everyone laughed at her for
her impossible determination. The news of her activity spread, and at last
Garuda, the gigantic bird carrier of Lord Visnu, heard it. He became
compassionate toward his small sister bird, and so he came to see the sparrow.
Garuda was very pleased by the determination of the small sparrow, and he
promised to help. Thus Garuda at once asked the ocean to return her eggs lest
he himself take up the work of the sparrow. The ocean was frightened at this,
and returned the eggs. Thus the sparrow became happy by the grace of Garuda.



Similarly, the practice of yoga, especially bhakti-yoga in Krsna
consciousness, may appear to be a very difficult job. But if anyone follows the
principles with great determination, the Lord will surely help, for God helps
those who help themselves.

TEXT 25

ﬁzWWﬂI
Wwwﬁﬁsﬁaﬁﬁaﬁauqau

s’cmaih s’cmair uparamed
buddhyc‘t dhrti—grhitayc‘t
citma—samstham mahah krtvd
ha kiﬁcid api cintayet

SYNONYMS

s’cmaih—gradually; s’cmaih—step by step; uparamet—one should hold back;
buddhyc't—by intelligence; dhrti-grhitayc‘t—carried by conviction;
citma—samstham—placed in transcendence; mahah—mind; krtvc‘t—making;
ha—not; kiﬁcit—anything else; api—even; cintayet—should think of.

TRANSLATION

Gradually, step by step, one should become situated in trance by means of
intelligence sustained by full conviction, and thus the mind should be fixed on
the self alone and should think of nothing else.

PURPORT

By proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense
activities. This is called pratyc'thc'n'a. The mind, being controlled by conviction,
meditation, and cessation from the senses, should be situated in trance, or
samadhi. At that time there is no longer any danger of becoming engaged in



the material conception of life. In other words, although one is involved with
matter as long as the material body exists, one should not think about sense
gratification. One should think of no pleasure aside from the pleasure of the
Supreme Self. This state is easily attained by directly practicing Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 26

Wﬂﬁmmml
Wwwmum

yato yato m's’calati
mamas” cahcalam asthiram
tatas tato hiyamyaitad
citmcmy eva vas’am hayet

SYNONYMS

yatah yatah—wherever; his’calati—becomes verily agitated; mahah—the mind;
cahcalam—ﬂickering; asthiram—unsteady; tatah tatah—from there;
hiyamya—regulating; etat—this; citmcmi—in the self; eva—certainly;
vas’am—control; hayet—must bring under.

TRANSLATION

From Wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and unsteady nature,
one must certainly Withdraw it and bring it back under the control of the self.

PURPORT

The nature of the mind is flickering and unsteady. But a self-realized yogi
has to control the mind; the mind should not control him. One who controls
the mind (and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvc'tmi, or svc‘tmi, and one
who is controlled by the mind is called go-dc'tsa, or the servant of the senses. A



gosvc‘tmi knows the standard of sense happiness. In transcendental sense
happiness, the senses are engaged in the service of Hrsikes’a, or the supreme
owner of the senses—Krsna. Serving Krsna with purified senses is called Krsna
consciousness. That is the way of bringing the senses under full control. What
is more, that is the highest perfection of yoga practice.

TEXT 27
W 25:14 ﬁﬁﬁf WI
ﬁﬁWWII 99 ||

pras’c‘mta—mahasam hy eham
yogiham sukham uttamam
upaiti s’c‘mta—rajasam
brahma-bhﬁtam akalmasam

SYNONYMS

pras’c‘mta—peaceful, fixed on the lotus feet of Krsna; mahasam—whose mind;
hi—certainly; enam—this; yogiham—yogi; sukham—happiness; uttamam—the
highest; upaiti—attains; s’dhta—rajasam—his passion pacified;
brahma-bhﬁtam—liberation by identification with the Absolute;
akalmasam—freed from all past sinful reactions.

TRANSLATION

The yogi Whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest perfection of
transcendental happiness. He is beyond the mode of passion, he realizes his
qualitative identity With the Supreme, and thus he is freed from all reactions to
past deeds.

PURPORT

Bmhma-bhﬁta is the state of being free from material contamination and



situated in the transcendental service of the Lord. Mad-bhaktim labhate param
(Bg. 18.54). One cannot remain in the quality of Brahman, the Absolute, until
one’s mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord. Sa vai mahah
krsha-padamvihdayoh. To be always engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, or to remain in Krsna consciousness, is to be factually
liberated from the mode of passion and all material contamination.

TEXT 28
WWWWH
WWwﬁﬁu Q: N

yuﬁjahh evam sadatmciham
yogi Uigata—kalmasah
sukheha brahma-samspars’am
atyahtam sukham as’hute

SYNONYMS

yuﬁjah—engaging in yoga practice; evam—thus; sadc‘t—always; citmc‘mam—the
self; yogi—one who is in touch with the Supreme Self; Uigata—freed from;
kalmasah—all material contamination; sukheha—in transcendental happiness;
brahma-samspars’am—being in constant touch with the Supreme;
atyahtam—the highest; sukham—happiness; as’hute—attains.

TRANSLATION

Thus the self-controlled yogi, constantly engaged in yoga practice, becomes
free from all material contamination and achieves the highest stage of perfect
happiness in transcendental loving service to the Lord.

PURPORT

Self-realization means knowing one’s constitutional position in relationship



to the Supreme. The individual soul is part and parcel of the Supreme, and his
position is to render transcendental service to the Lord. This transcendental
contact with the Supreme is called brahma-samspars’a.

TEXT 29

WWWI
éaﬁaimaéaanaﬁhzuqsu

sarva—bhﬁta—stham citmdham
sarva—bhﬁtc‘mi cc‘ttmcmi
iksate yoga—yuktcitmc‘t
sarvatra sama—dars’ahah

SYNONYMS

sarva—bhIZta—stham—situated in all beings; citmc‘mam—the Supersoul;
sarva—all; thZtc‘mi—entities; ca—also; citmcmi—in the self; iksate—does see;
yoga-yukta-c‘ttmc‘t—one who is dovetailed in Krsna consciousness;
sarvatra—everywhere; sama—dars’ahah—seeing equally.

TRANSLATION

A true yogi observes Me in all beings and also sees every being in Me.
Indeed, the self-realized person sees Me, the same Supreme Lord, everywhere.

PURPORT

A Krsna conscious yogi is the perfect seer because he sees Krsna, the
Supreme, situated in everyone’s heart as Supersoul (Paramatma). Is’vamh
sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm th—des’e ’rjuha tisthati. The Lord in His Paramatma feature is
situated within both the heart of the dog and that of a brc‘thmaha. The perfect
yogi knows that the Lord is eternally transcendental and is not materially
affected by His presence in either a dog or a brc‘thmaha. That is the supreme



neutrality of the Lord. The individual soul is also situated in the individual
heart, but he is not present in all hearts. That is the distinction between the
individual soul and the Supersoul. One who is not factually in the practice of
yoga cannot see so clearly. A Krsna conscious person can see Krsna in the
heart of both the believer and the nonbeliever. In the smrti this is confirmed
as follows: citatatvc‘tc ca mcitrtvc‘tc ca citmd hi paramo harih. The Lord, being the
source of all beings, is like the mother and the maintainer. As the mother is
neutral to all different kinds of children, the supreme father (or mother) is
also. Consequently the Supersoul is always in every living being.

Outwardly, also, every living being is situated in the energy of the Lord. As
will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, the Lord has, primarily, two
energies—the spiritual (or superior) and the material (or inferior). The living
entity, although part of the superior energy, is conditioned by the inferior
energy; the living entity is always in the Lord’s energy. Every living entity is
situated in Him in one way or another.

The yogi sees equally because he sees that all living entities, although in
different situations according to the results of fruitive work, in all
circumstances remain the servants of God. While in the material energy, the
living entity serves the material senses; and while in spiritual energy, he serves
the Supreme Lord directly. In either case the living entity is the servant of
God. This Vision of equality is perfect in a person in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 30

aintcrsqﬁraaiaaaiatrﬁrmﬁn
Wamﬁaaﬁﬁmﬁrusml

yo mam pas’yati sarvatra
sarvam ca mayi pas’yati

tasyc‘tham ha prahas’yc‘tmi
sa ca me ha prahas’yati



SYNONYMS

yah—whoever; mcim—Me; pas’yati—sees; sarvatra—everywhere;
sarvam—everything; ca—and; mayi—in Me; pas’yati—sees; tasya—for him;
aham—I; ha—not; prahas’yc‘tmi—am lost; sah—he; ca—also; me—to Me;
ha—nor; prahas’yati—is lost.

TRANSLATION

For one Who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never lost,
nor is he ever lost to Me.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness certainly sees Lord Krsna everywhere, and
he sees everything in Krsna. Such a person may appear to see all separate
manifestations of the material nature, but in each and every instance he is
conscious of Krsna, knowing that everything is a manifestation of Krsna’s
energy. Nothing can exist without Krsna, and Krsna is the Lord of
everything—this is the basic principle of Krsna consciousness. Krsna
consciousness is the development of love of Krsna—a position transcendental
even to material liberation. At this stage of Krsna consciousness, beyond
self-realization, the devotee becomes one with Krsna in the sense that Krsna
becomes everything for the devotee and the devotee becomes full in loving
Krsna. An intimate relationship between the Lord and the devotee then exists.
In that stage, the living entity can never be annihilated, nor is the Personality
of Godhead ever out of the sight of the devotee. To merge in Krsna is spiritual
annihilation. A devotee takes no such risk. It is stated in the Brabma-sambité

(5.38):

premaﬁjaha-cchurita-bhakti—Uilocaheha
santah sadaiva hrdayesu Uilokayahti
yam s’yc‘tmasundaram acintya—guha—svampam
govindam adi—pmusam tam aham bhajdmi



“I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the devotee
whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in His eternal form
of Syamasundara, situated within the heart of the devotee.”

At this stage, Lord Krsna never disappears from the sight of the devotee,
nor does the devotee ever lose sight of the Lord. In the case of a yogi who sees
the Lord as Paramatma within the heart, the same applies. Such a yogi turns
into a pure devotee and cannot bear to live for a moment without seeing the

Lord within himself.

TEXT 31

memmwmu
aﬁmaﬁmﬁﬁaﬁhﬁnﬁraﬁﬁuwu

sarva—bhﬁta—sthitam yo mam
bhajaty ekatvam asthitah
sarvathc‘t vartamc‘mo ’pi
sa yogi mayi vartate

SYNONYMS

sarva—thZta—sthitam—situated in everyone’s heart; yah—he who; mcim—Me;
bhajati—serves in devotional service; ekatvam—in oneness; cisthitah—situated;
sarvathc‘t—in all respects; varta-mc‘mah—being situated; api—in spite of;
sah—he; yogi—the transcendentalist; mayi—in Me; vartate—remains.

TRANSLATION

Such a yogi, Who engages in the worshipful service of the Supersoul,
knowing that I and the Supersoul are one, remains always in Me in all
circumstances.

PURPORT



A yogi who is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees within himself
the plenary portion of Krsna as Visnu—with four hands, holding conchshell,
wheel, club and lotus ﬂower. The yogi should know that Visnu is not different
from Krsna. Krsna in this form of Supersoul is situated in everyone’s heart.
Furthermore, there is no difference between the innumerable Supersouls
present in the innumerable hearts of living entities. Nor is there a difference
between a Krsna conscious person always engaged in the transcendental loving
service of Krsna and a perfect yogi engaged in meditation on the Supersoul.
The yogi in Krsna consciousness—even though he may be engaged in various
activities while in material existence—remains always situated in Krsna. This
is confirmed in the Bbakti—rasﬁmrta-smdbu (1.2.187) of Srila Rfipa Gosvami:
hikhilc‘tsv apy avasthc‘tsu jivah—muktah sa ucyate. A devotee of the Lord, always
acting in Krsna consciousness, is automatically liberated. In the
Narada—paﬁcarc‘ttm this is confirmed in this way:

dik—kc‘tlc‘tdy—ahavacchihhe
krshe ceto vidhc‘tya ca

tah—mayo bhavati ksipram
jivo brahmahi yojayet

“By concentrating one’s attention on the transcendental form of Krsna,
who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one becomes absorbed in
thinking of Krsna and then attains the happy state of transcendental
association with Him.”

Krsna consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice. This
very understanding that Krsna is present as Paramatma in everyone’s heart
makes the yogi faultless. The Vedas (Gopéla-tépam‘ Upam'saa 1.21) confirm this
inconceivable potency of the Lord as follows: eko ’pi scm bahudhc‘t yo ’Uabhc‘tti.
“Although the Lord is one, He is present in innumerable hearts as many.”
Similarly, in the smrti—s’c‘tstra it is said:

eka eva paro vishuh
sarva—vyc‘tpi ha sams’ayah
ais’varyc‘td rﬁpam ekam ca



sﬁrya-vat bahudheyate

“Visnu is one, and yet He is certainly all-pervading. By His inconceivable
potency, in spite of His one form, He is present everywhere, as the sun appears
in many places at once.”

TEXT 32

WWWWH‘Q‘HI
gamzrﬁaigzlaiaq‘hﬁw‘inazuaau

citmaupamyena sarvatra
samam pas’yati yo ’rjuha
sukham vc‘t yadi vc‘t duhkham
sa yogi paramo matah

SYNONYMS

citma—with his self; aupamyeha—by comparison; sarvatra—everywhere;
samam—equally; pas’yati—sees; yah—he who; arjuha—O Arjuna;
sukham—happiness; vc‘t—or; yadi—if; vc‘t—or; duhkham—distress; sah—such;
yogi—a transcendentalist; paramah—perfect; matah—is considered.

TRANSLATION

He is a perfect yogi Who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true
equality of all beings, in both their happiness and their distress, O Arjuna!

PURPORT

One who is Krsna conscious is a perfect yogi; he is aware of everyone’s
happiness and distress by dint of his own personal experience. The cause of the
distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of his relationship with God. And the
cause of happiness is knowing Krsna to be the supreme enjoyer of all the
activities of the human being, the proprietor of all lands and planets, and the



sincerest friend of all living entities. The perfect yogi knows that the living
being who is conditioned by the modes of material nature is subjected to the
threefold material miseries due to forgetfulness of his relationship with Krsna.
And because one in Krsna consciousness is happy, he tries to distribute the
knowledge of Krsna everywhere. Since the perfect yogi tries to broadcast the
importance of becoming Krsna conscious, he is the best philanthropist in the
world, and he is the dearest servitor of the Lord. Na ca tasmc‘m manusyesu
kas’cih me priya—krttamah (Bg. 18.69). In other words, a devotee of the Lord
always looks to the welfare of all living entities, and in this way he is factually
the friend of everyone. He is the best yogi because he does not desire
perfection in yoga for his personal benefit, but tries for others also. He does
not envy his fellow living entities. Here is a contrast between a pure devotee of
the Lord and a yogi interested only in his personal elevation. The yogi who has
withdrawn to a secluded place in order to meditate perfectly may not be as
perfect as a devotee who is trying his best to turn every man toward Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 33

Wain?
wﬁmmzaﬂanwl
WHWWWMBII

arjuha uvc‘tca
yo ’yam yogas tvayc‘t proktah
scimyeha madhusﬁdaha
etasyc‘tham ha pas’yc‘tmi
caﬁcalawc‘tt sthitim sthirc‘tm

SYNONYMS

arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; yah ayam—this system; yogah—mysticism;
tvayc‘t—by You; proktah—described; scimyeha—generally; madhu—sﬁdaha—O



killer of the demon Madhu; etasya—of this; aham—I; ha—do not;
pas’yc‘tmi—see; caﬁcalatvc‘tt—due to being restless; sthitim—situation;
sthirc‘Im—stable.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Madhusﬁdana, the system of yoga Which You have
summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is restless
and unsteady.

PURPORT

The system of mysticism described by Lord Krsna to Arjuna beginning with
the words s’ucau des’e and ending with yogi paramah is here being rejected by
Arjuna out of a feeling of inability. It is not possible for an ordinary man to
leave home and go to a secluded place in the mountains or jungles to practice
yoga in this Age of Kali. The present age is characterized by a bitter struggle
for a life of short duration. People are not serious about self-realization even by
simple, practical means, and what to speak of this difficult yoga system, which
regulates the mode of living, the manner of sitting, selection of place, and
detachment of the mind from material engagements. As a practical man,
Arjuna thought it was impossible to follow this system of yoga, even though he
was favorably endowed in many ways. He belonged to the royal family and was
highly elevated in terms of numerous qualities; he was a great warrior, he had
great longevity, and, above all, he was the most intimate friend of Lord Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Five thousand years ago, Arjuna had
much better facilities than we do now, yet he refused to accept this system of
yoga. In fact, we do not find any record in history of his practicing it at any
time. Therefore this system must be considered generally impossible in this
Age of Kali. Of course it may be possible for some very few, rare men, but for
the people in general it is an impossible proposal. If this were so five thousand
years ago, then what of the present day? Those who are imitating this yoga
system in different so-called schools and societies, although complacent, are
certainly wasting their time. They are completely in ignorance of the desired



goaL

TEXT 34

MEWWWWI
WWWWWHBII

caﬁcalam hi mahah krsha

pramc‘tthi balavad drdham

tasyc‘tham higmham manye
vc‘tyor iva su—duskaram

SYNONYMS

cahcalam—ﬂickering; hi—certainly; mahah—mind; krsha—O Krsna;
pramc‘tthi—agitating; bala-vat—strong; drdham—obstinate; tasya—its;
aham—I; higraham—subduing; mahye—think; vc‘tyoh—of the wind; iva—like;
su—duskaram—difficult.

TRANSLATION

For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, 0 Krsna, and
to subdue it, I think, is more difficult than controlling the Wind.

PURPORT

The mind is so strong and obstinate that it sometimes overcomes the
intelligence, although the mind is supposed to be subservient to the
intelligence. For a man in the practical world who has to fight so many
opposing elements, it is certainly very difficult to control the mind.
Artificially, one may establish a mental equilibrium toward both friend and
enemy, but ultimately no worldly man can do so, for this is more difficult than
controlling the raging wind. In the Vedic literature (Katha Upam'saa 1.3.3—4)
it is said:



citmc‘mam rathiham viddhi
s’ariram ratham eva ca
buddhim tu scirathim viddhi
mahah pragraham eva ca

ihdriyc‘mi hayc‘m c‘Ihm

visayc‘tms tesu gocarc‘m
citmehdriya—maho—yuktam
bhoktety c‘Ihm mahisihah

“The individual is the passenger in the car of the material body, and
intelligence is the driver. Mind is the driving instrument, and the senses are
the horses. The self is thus the enjoyer or sufferer in the association of the
mind and senses. So it is understood by great thinkers.” Intelligence is
supposed to direct the mind, but the mind is so strong and obstinate that it
often overcomes even one’s own intelligence, as an acute infection may surpass
the efficacy of medicine. Such a strong mind is supposed to be controlled by
the practice of yoga, but such practice is never practical for a worldly person
like Arjuna. And what can we say of modern man? The simile used here is
appropriate: one cannot capture the blowing wind. And it is even more
difficult to capture the turbulent mind. The easiest way to control the mind, as
suggested by Lord Caitanya, is chanting “Hare Krsna,” the great mantra for
deliverance, in all humility. The method prescribed is sa vai mahah
krsha-padamvmdayoh: one must engage one’s mind fully in Krsna. Only then
will there remain no other engagements to agitate the mind.

TEXT 35

. . ah'a'a'ia'a .
WWHﬁigﬁmmI
Waﬁﬁaﬁtﬁwawﬁuaau

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca



asams’ayam mahc‘t-bc‘tho
memo dumigraham calam
abhyc‘tseha tu kauhteya
vairc‘tgyeha ca grhyate

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Personality of Godhead said;
asams’ayam—undoubtedly; mahc‘I-bc‘tho—O mighty-armed one; mahah—the
mind; dumigraham—difficult to curb; calam—ﬂickering; abhyc‘tseha—by
practice; tu—but; kauhteya—O son of Kunti; vairc‘tgyeha—by detachment;
ca—also; grhyate—can be so controlled.

TRANSLATION

Lord 81:1 Krsna said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubtedly very
difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by suitable practice and by
detachment.

PURPORT

The difficulty of controlling the obstinate mind, as expressed by Arjuna, is
accepted by the Personality of Godhead. But at the same time He suggests that
by practice and detachment it is possible. What is that practice? In the present
age no one can observe the strict rules and regulations of placing oneself in a
sacred place, focusing the mind on the Supersoul, restraining the senses and
mind, observing celibacy, remaining alone, etc. By the practice of Krsna
consciousness, however, one engages in nine types of devotional service to the
Lord. The first and foremost of such devotional engagements is hearing about
Krsna. This is a very powerful transcendental method for purging the mind of
all misgivings. The more one hears about Krsna, the more one becomes
enlightened and detached from everything that draws the mind away from
Krsna. By detaching the mind from activities not devoted to the Lord, one can
very easily learn vairagya. Vairc'tgya means detachment from matter and



engagement of the mind in spirit. Impersonal spiritual detachment is more
difficult than attaching the mind to the activities of Krsna. This is practical
because by hearing about Krsna one becomes automatically attached to the
Supreme Spirit. This attachment is called pares’c'mubhava, spiritual satisfaction.
It is just like the feeling of satisfaction a hungry man has for every morsel of
food he eats. The more one eats while hungry, the more one feels satisfaction
and strength. Similarly, by discharge of devotional service one feels
transcendental satisfaction as the mind becomes detached from material
objectives. It is something like curing a disease by expert treatment and
appropriate diet. Hearing of the transcendental activities of Lord Krsna is
therefore expert treatment for the mad mind, and eating the foodstuff offered
to Krsna is the appropriate diet for the suffering patient. This treatment is the
process of Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 36

Wtﬁiwsﬁrﬁqﬁm
wgmmsarwm: |I3$II

asamyatc‘ttmahc‘t yogo

dusprc‘tpa iti me matih

vas’yc‘Itmahc‘t tu yatatc‘t
s’akyo ’vc‘tptum updyatah

SYNONYMS

asamyata—unbridled; citmahc‘t—by the mind; yogah—self-realization;
dusprc‘tpah—difficult to obtain; iti—thus; me—My; matih—opinion;
vas’ya—controlled; citmcmc‘t—by the mind; tu—but; yatatc‘t—while
endeavoring; s’akyah—practical; avc‘tptum—to achieve; upc‘tyatah—by
appropriate means.

TRANSLATION



For one Whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work. But he
Whose mind is controlled and Who strives by appropriate means is assured of
success. That is My opinion.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead declares that one who does not
accept the proper treatment to detach the mind from material engagement can
hardly achieve success in self-realization. Trying to practice yoga while
engaging the mind in material enjoyment is like trying to ignite a fire while
pouring water on it. Yoga practice without mental control is a waste of time.
Such a show of yoga may be materially lucrative, but it is useless as far as
spiritual realization is concerned. Therefore, one must control the mind by
engaging it constantly in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Unless
one is engaged in Krsna consciousness, he cannot steadily control the mind. A
Krsna conscious person easily achieves the result of yoga practice without
separate endeavor, but a yoga practitioner cannot achieve success without
becoming Krsna conscious.

TEXT 37

WW
mﬁzmﬁa‘rﬁimmzl
WWWﬁWWﬁIIaeII

arjuha uvc‘tca
ayatih s’raddhayopeto
yogac calita—mc‘masah
aprc‘tpya yoga—samsiddhim
kam gatim krsha gacchati

SYNONYMS



arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; ayatih—the unsuccessful transcendentalist;
s’raddhayd—with faith; upetah—engaged; yogc‘tt—from the mystic link;
calita—deviated; mc‘masah—who has such a mind; aprc‘tpya—failing to attain;
yoga—samsiddhim—the highest perfection in mysticism; kam—which;
gatim—destination; krsha—O Krsna; gacchati—achieves.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O Krsna, What is the destination of the unsuccessful
transcendentalist, Who in the beginning takes to the process of self-realization
With faith but Who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and thus does not
attain perfection in mysticism?

PURPORT

The path of self-realization or mysticism is described in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t.
The basic principle of self-realization is knowledge that the living entity is not
this material body but that he is different from it and that his happiness is in
eternal life, bliss and knowledge. These are transcendental, beyond both body
and mind. Self-realization is sought by the path of knowledge, by the practice
of the eightfold system or by bhakti-yoga. In each of these processes one has to
realize the constitutional position of the living entity, his relationship with
God, and the activities whereby he can reestablish the lost link and achieve
the highest perfectional stage of Krsna consciousness. Following any of the
above-mentioned three methods, one is sure to reach the supreme goal sooner
or later. This was asserted by the Lord in the Second Chapter: even a little
endeavor on the transcendental path offers a great hope for deliverance. Out
of these three methods, the path of bhakti-yoga is especially suitable for this
age because it is the most direct method of God realization. To be doubly
assured, Arjuna is asking Lord Krsna to confirm His former statement. One
may sincerely accept the path of self-realization, but the process of cultivation
of knowledge and the practice of the eightfold yoga system are generally very
difficult for this age. Therefore, despite constant endeavor one may fail, for
many reasons. First of all, one may not be sufficiently serious about following



the process. To pursue the transcendental path is more or less to declare war
on the illusory energy. Consequently, whenever a person tries to escape the
clutches of the illusory energy, she tries to defeat the practitioner by various
allurements. A conditioned soul is already allured by the modes of material
energy, and there is every chance of being allured again, even while
performing transcendental disciplines. This is called yogac calita—mc‘masah:
deviation from the transcendental path. Arjuna is inquisitive to know the
results of deviation from the path of self-realization.

TEXT 38

WWI
WWWW:WII3=II

kaccih hobhaya—vibhrastas’
chihhc‘tbhram iva has’yati
apratistho mahc‘I-bc‘tho
vimﬁdho brahmahah pathi

SYNONYMS

kaccit—whether; ha—not; ubhaya—both; vibhrastah—deviated from;
chihha—torn; abhram—cloud; iva—like; has’yati—perishes;
apratisthah—without any position; mahc‘t-bc‘tho—O mighty-armed Krsna;
vimﬁdhah—bewildered; brahmahah—of transcendence; pathi—on the path.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed Krsna, does not such a man, Who is bewildered from the
path of transcendence, fall away from both spiritual and material success and
perish like a riven cloud, With no position in any sphere?

PURPORT



There are two ways to progress. Those who are materialists have no interest
in transcendence; therefore they are more interested in material advancement
by economic development, or in promotion to the higher planets by
appropriate work. When one takes to the path of transcendence, one has to
cease all material activities and sacrifice all forms of so-called material
happiness. If the aspiring transcendentalist fails, then he apparently loses both
ways; in other words, he can enjoy neither material happiness nor spiritual
success. He has no position; he is like a riven cloud. A cloud in the sky
sometimes deviates from a small cloud and joins a big one. But if it cannot join
a big one, then it is blown away by the wind and becomes a nonentity in the
vast sky. The brahmahah pathi is the path of transcendental realization
through knowing oneself to be spiritual in essence, part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord, who is manifested as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Lord
Sri Krsna is the fullest manifestation of the Supreme Absolute Truth, and
therefore one who is surrendered to the Supreme Person is a successful
transcendentalist. To reach this goal of life through Brahman and Paramatma
realization takes many, many births (bahﬁnc‘tm jahmahcim cmte [Bg. 7.19]).
Therefore the supermost path of transcendental realization is bhakti-yoga, or
Krsna consciousness, the direct method.

TEXT 39

Qﬁﬁaﬁﬁwmﬂﬁzl

WtwéT-HHWIIBQH

etcm me sams’ayam krsha
chettum arhasy as’esatah
tvad—anyah sams’ayasyc‘tsya
chettc‘t ha hy upapadyate
SYNONYMS
etat—this is; me—my; sams’ayam—doubt; krsha—O Krsna; chettum—to dispel;



arhasi—You are requested; as’esatah—completely; tvat—than You;
anyah—other; sams’ayasya—of the doubt; asya—this; chettc‘I—remover;
ha—never; hi—certainly; upapadyate—is to be found.

TRANSLATION

This is my doubt, O Krsna, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But for
You, no one is to be found Who can destroy this doubt.

PURPORT

Krsna is the perfect knower of past, present and future. In the beginning of
the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the Lord said that all living entities existed individually in
the past, they exist now in the present, and they continue to retain individual
identity in the future, even after liberation from the material entanglement.
80 He has already cleared up the question of the future of the individual living
entity. Now, Arjuna wants to know of the future of the unsuccessful
transcendentalist. No one is equal to or above Krsna, and certainly the
so-called great sages and philosophers who are at the mercy of material nature
cannot equal Him. Therefore the verdict of Krsna is the final and complete
answer to all doubts, because He knows past, present and future perfectly—but
no one knows Him. Krsna and Krsna conscious devotees alone can know what
is what.

TEXT 40

911143131131?
mﬁﬁswﬁmﬁmﬁaﬁI
ﬁﬁmfaeﬁiﬁaﬁwﬁueou

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
pc‘wtha naiveha hamutra
Uihas’as tasya vidyate



ha hi kalyc‘ma—krt kas’cid
durgatim tc‘tta gacchati

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pc‘wtha—O son
of Prtha; ha eva—never is it so; iha—in this material world; ha—never;
amutm—in the next life; Uihas’ah—destruction; tasya—his; vidyate—exists;
ha—never; hi—certainly; kalyc‘ma-krt—one who is engaged in auspicious
activities; kas’cit—anyone; dmgatim—to degradation; tc'tta—My friend;
gacchati—goes.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Son of Prtha, a transcendentalist
engaged in auspicious activities does not meet With destruction either in this
world or in the spiritual world; one Who does good, My friend, is never
overcome by evil.

PURPORT

In the grimad-Bbégavatam (1.5.17) Sri Narada Muni instructs Vyasadeva as
follows:

tyaktvc‘t sva—dharmam carahc‘tmbujam hater
bhajcmh apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vc‘tbhadram abhﬁd amusya kim
k0 Udrtha dpto ’bhajatc‘tm sva—dharmatah

“If someone gives up all material prospects and takes complete shelter of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no loss or degradation in any way.
On the other hand a nondevotee may fully engage in his occupational duties
and yet not gain anything.” For material prospects there are many activities,
both scriptural and customary. A transcendentalist is supposed to give up all
material activities for the sake of spiritual advancement in life, Krsna



consciousness. One may argue that by Krsna consciousness one may attain the
highest perfection if it is completed, but if one does not attain such a
perfectional stage, then he loses both materially and spiritually. It is enjoined
in the scriptures that one has to suffer the reaction for not executing
prescribed duties; therefore one who fails to discharge transcendental
activities properly becomes subjected to these reactions. The th‘tgavatam
assures the unsuccessful transcendentalist that there need be no worries. Even
though he may be subjected to the reaction for not perfectly executing
prescribed duties, he is still not a loser, because auspicious Krsna consciousness
is never forgotten, and one so engaged will continue to be so even if he is
lowborn in the next life. On the other hand, one who simply follows strictly
the prescribed duties need not necessarily attain auspicious results if he is
lacking in Krsna consciousness.

The purport may be understood as follows. Humanity may be divided into
two sections, namely, the regulated and the nonregulated. Those who are
engaged simply in bestial sense gratifications without knowledge of their next
life or spiritual salvation belong to the nonregulated section. And those who
follow the principles of prescribed duties in the scriptures are classified
amongst the regulated section. The nonregulated section, both civilized and
noncivilized, educated and noneducated, strong and weak, are full of animal
propensities. Their activities are never auspicious, because while enjoying the
animal propensities of eating, sleeping, defending and mating, they perpetually
remain in material existence, which is always miserable. On the other hand,
those who are regulated by scriptural injunctions, and who thus rise gradually
to Krsna consciousness, certainly progress in life.

Those who are following the path of auspiciousness can be divided into
three sections, namely (1) the followers of scriptural rules and regulations who
are enjoying material prosperity, (2) those who are trying to find ultimate
liberation from material existence, and (3) those who are devotees in Krsna
consciousness. Those who are following the rules and regulations of the
scriptures for material happiness may be further divided into two classes: those
who are fruitive workers and those who desire no fruit for sense gratification.
Those who are after fruitive results for sense gratification may be elevated to a



higher standard of life—even to the higher planets—but still, because they are
not free from material existence, they are not following the truly auspicious
path. The only auspicious activities are those which lead one to liberation.
Any activity which is not aimed at ultimate self-realization or liberation from
the material bodily concept of life is not at all auspicious. Activity in Krsna
consciousness is the only auspicious activity, and anyone who voluntarily
accepts all bodily discomforts for the sake of making progress on the path of
Krsna consciousness can be called a perfect transcendentalist under severe
austerity. And because the eightfold yoga system is directed toward the
ultimate realization of Krsna consciousness, such practice is also auspicious,
and no one who is trying his best in this matter need fear degradation.

TEXT 41

mWﬁmﬁamaizamzl
WWﬁﬁﬁwﬁiﬁ-ﬁmﬁumu

prc‘tpya punya—krtc‘tm lokc‘m
usitvc‘t s’c‘ts’vatih samah
s’ucim‘tm s’rimatc‘tm gehe
yoga—bhrasto ’bhijc‘tyate

SYNONYMS

prc‘tpya—after achieving; punya-krtc‘tm—of those who performed pious
activities; lokc‘m—planets; usitvc‘t—after dwelling; s’c'ts’vatih—many;
samah—years; s’ucihc‘Im—of the pious; s’ri—matcim—of the prosperous; gehe—in
the house; yoga-bhrastah—one who has fallen from the path of self-realization;
abhijc‘tyate—takes his birth.

TRANSLATION

The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets
of the pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous people, or into a



family of rich aristocracy.

PURPORT

The unsuccessful yogis are divided into two classes: one is fallen after very
little progress, and one is fallen after long practice of yoga. The yogi who falls
after a short period of practice goes to the higher planets, where pious living
entities are allowed to enter. After prolonged life there, one is sent back again
to this planet, to take birth in the family of a righteous brc‘thmaha vaishava or
of aristocratic merchants.

The real purpose of yoga practice is to achieve the highest perfection of
Krsna consciousness, as explained in the last verse of this chapter. But those
who do not persevere to such an extent and who fail because of material
allurements are allowed, by the grace of the Lord, to make full utilization of
their material propensities. And after that, they are given opportunities to live
prosperous lives in righteous or aristocratic families. Those who are born in
such families may take advantage of the facilities and try to elevate themselves
to full Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 42

awaiﬁmﬂagﬁmaﬁr'eﬁmI
WWEEIQEWWIISQII

atha vc‘t yogmc‘tm eva
kule bhavati dhimatc‘tm
etad dhi durlabhataram
loke jcmma yad idrs’am

SYNONYMS

atha vc‘t—or; yogmc‘tm—of learned transcendentalists; eva—certainly; kule—in
the family; bhavati—takes birth; dhi-matc'tm—of those who are endowed with
great wisdom; etat—this; hi—certainly; durlabha—taram—very rare; loke—in



this world; jahma—birth; yat—that which; idrs’am—like this.

TRANSLATION

Or [if unsuccessful after long practice of yoga] he takes his birth in a family
of transcendentalists Who are surely great in Wisdom. Certainly, such a birth is
rare in this world.

PURPORT

Birth in a family of yogis or transcendentalists—those with great
wisdom—is praised herein because the child born in such a family receives a
spiritual impetus from the very beginning of his life. It is especially the case in
the cicc'n‘ya or gosvc‘tmi families. Such families are very learned and devoted by
tradition and training, and thus they become spiritual masters. In India there
are many such cicc'n‘ya families, but they have now degenerated due to
insufficient education and training. By the grace of the Lord, there are still
families that foster transcendentalists generation after generation. It is
certainly very fortunate to take birth in such families. Fortunately, both our
spiritual master, Om Visnupada Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Gosvami Maharaja, and our humble self had the opportunity to take birth in
such families, by the grace of the Lord, and both of us were trained in the
devotional service of the Lord from the very beginning of our lives. Later on
we met by the order of the transcendental system.

TEXT 43

ﬁegﬁaﬁﬁaﬁﬁéﬁféﬁl
mﬁaaﬁiwﬁzaﬁlﬁwueau

tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
labhate pamva—dehikam
yatate ca tato bhﬁyah
samsiddhau kmu—hahdaha



SYNONYMS

tatra—thereupon; tam—that; buddhi—samyogam—revival of consciousness;
labhate—gains; pamva—dehikam—from the previous body; yatate—he
endeavors; ca—also; tatah—thereafter; bhﬁyah—again; samsiddhau—for
perfection; kum—hahdaha—O son of Kuru.

TRANSLATION

On taking such a birth, he revives the divine consciousness of his previous
life, and he again tries to make further progress in order to achieve complete
success, 0 son of Kuru.

PURPORT

King Bharata, who took his third birth in the family of a good brc‘thmaha, is
an example of good birth for the revival of previous transcendental
consciousness. King Bharata was the emperor of the world, and since his time
this planet has been known among the demigods as Bharata-Varsa. Formerly it
was known as Ilavrta-Varsa. The emperor, at an early age, retired for spiritual
perfection but failed to achieve success. In his next life he took birth in the
family of a good brc‘thmaha and was known as Jada Bharata because he always
remained secluded and did not talk to anyone. And later on he was discovered
as the greatest transcendentalist by King Rahﬂgana. From his life it is
understood that transcendental endeavors, or the practice of yoga, never go in
vain. By the grace of the Lord the transcendentalist gets repeated
opportunities for complete perfection in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 44

maﬁaiﬁﬂﬁmsﬁﬁzl
WWW" 88 ||



pﬁrvc‘tbhyc‘tseha tehaiva

hriyate hy avas’o ’pi sah
jijhc‘tsm api yogasya

s’abda—brahmc‘ttivartate

SYNONYMS

pﬁrva—previous; abhyc‘tseha—by practice; teha—by that; eva—certainly;
hriyate—is attracted; hi—surely; avas’ah—automatically; api—also; sah—he;
jijﬁc‘tsuh—inquisitive; api—even; yogasya—about yoga;
s’abda—brahma—ritualistic principles of scriptures; ativartate—transcends.

TRANSLATION

By Virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he automatically
becomes attracted to the yogic principles—even Without seeking them. Such an
inquisitive transcendentalist stands always above the ritualistic principles of the
scriptures.

PURPORT

Advanced yogis are not very much attracted to the rituals of the scriptures,
but they automatically become attracted to the yoga principles, which can
elevate them to complete Krsna consciousness, the highest yoga perfection. In

the grimad-Bbégavatam (3.33.7), such disregard of Vedic rituals by the
advanced transcendentalists is explained as follows:

aho bata s’va-paco ’to gariyc‘m
yaj—jihvc‘tgre vartate hama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sashur ciryc‘t
brahmc‘mﬁcm hama gmahti ye te

“O my Lord! Persons who chant the holy names of Your Lordship are far,
far advanced in spiritual life, even if born in families of dog-eaters. Such
chanters have undoubtedly performed all kinds of austerities and sacrifices,



bathed in all sacred places, and finished all scriptural studies.”

The famous example of this was presented by Lord Caitanya, who accepted
Thakura Haridasa as one of His most important disciples. Although Thakura
Haridasa happened to take his birth in a Muslim family, he was elevated to the
post of mimcicc'n'ya by Lord Caitanya due to his rigidly attended principle of
chanting three hundred thousand holy names of the Lord daily: Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare. And because he chanted the holy name of the Lord constantly, it is
understood that in his previous life he must have passed through all the
ritualistic methods of the Vedas, known as s’abda-bi‘ahma. Unless, therefore,
one is purified, one cannot take to the principles of Krsna consciousness or
become engaged in chanting the holy name of the Lord, Hare Krsna.

TEXT 45

staeeeam
WWWWWII8KII

prayathc‘td yatamc‘mas tu

yogi samsuddha-kilbisah

aheka-jahma—samsiddhas
tato yc‘tti parc‘tm gatim

SYNONYMS

prayatm‘tt—by rigid practice; yatamc‘mah—endeavoring; tu—and; yogi—such a
transcendentalist; samsuddha—washed off; kilbisah—all of whose sins;
cmeka—after many, many; jcmma—births; samsiddhah—having achieved
perfection; tatah—thereafter; yc‘tti—attains; param—the highest;
gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION
And When the yogi engages himself With sincere endeavor in making further



progress, being washed of all contaminations, then ultimately, achieving
perfection after many, many births of practice, he attains the supreme goal.

PURPORT

A person born in a particularly righteous, aristocratic or sacred family
becomes conscious of his favorable condition for executing yoga practice. With
determination, therefore, he begins his unfinished task, and thus he
completely cleanses himself of all material contaminations. When he is finally
free from all contaminations, he attains the supreme perfection—Krsna
consciousness. Krsna consciousness is the perfect stage of being freed of all
contaminations. This is confirmed in the Bbagavad—gité (7.28):

yesc‘tm tv anta-gatam papam
jahahc‘tm punya—karmahc‘tm
te dvahdva—moha-hirmuktc‘t

bhajcmte mam drdha-watc‘th

“After many, many births of executing pious activities, when one is
completely freed from all contaminations, and from all illusory dualities, one
becomes engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.”

TEXT 46

mﬁswwméﬁsﬁ naseam
WWWWWII 8S ||

tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogi
jﬁc‘mibhyo ’pi mato ’dhikah

karmibhyas’ cc‘tdhiko yogi

tasmc‘td yogi bhavc‘trjuha

SYNONYMS

tapasvibhyah—than the ascetics; adhikah—greater; yogi—the yogi;



jﬁc‘mibhyah—than the wise; api—also; matah—considered; adhikah—greater;
karmibhyah—than the fruitive workers; ca—also; adhikah—greater; yogi—the
yogi; tasmc‘It—therefore; yogi—a transcendentalist; bhava—just become;
arjuha—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

A yogi is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and greater
than the fruitive worker. Therefore, 0 Arjuna, in all circumstances, be a yogi.

PURPORT

When we speak of yoga we refer to linking our consciousness with the
Supreme Absolute Truth. Such a process is named differently by various
practitioners in terms of the particular method adopted. When the linking
process is predominantly in fruitive activities it is called karma-yoga, when it is
predominantly empirical it is called jﬁc‘ma-yoga, and when it is predominantly
in a devotional relationship with the Supreme Lord it is called bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, is the ultimate perfection of all yogas, as
will be explained in the next verse. The Lord has confirmed herein the
superiority of yoga, but He has not mentioned that it is better than bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga is full spiritual knowledge, and therefore nothing can excel it.
Asceticism without self-knowledge is imperfect. Empiric knowledge without
surrender to the Supreme Lord is also imperfect. And fruitive work without
Krsna consciousness is a waste of time. Therefore, the most highly praised form
of yoga performance mentioned here is bhakti-yoga, and this is still more
clearly explained in the next verse.

TEXT 47

?frﬁmmfﬁaé‘qfnqﬁmetml
Wﬁwaﬁaﬁn‘rnﬁzueeu

yogihc‘tm api sarvesc‘tm



mad—gatem‘mtar-citmam‘t
s’raddhc‘wc‘m bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah

SYNONYMS

yogihc‘tm—of yogis; api—also; sarvesc‘tm—all types of; mat—gateha—abiding in
Me, always thinking of Me; antah—c‘ttmam‘t—within himself; s’raddhc‘I—vc‘m—in
full faith; bhajate—renders transcendental loving service; yah—one who;
mam—to Me (the Supreme Lord); sah—he; me—by Me; yukta—tamah—the
greatest yogi; matah—is considered.

TRANSLATION

And of all yogis, the one With great faith Who always abides in Me, thinks of
Me Within himself, and renders transcendental loving service to Me—he is the
most intimately united With Me in yoga and is the highest of all. That is My
opinion.

PURPORT

The word bhajate is significant here. Bhajate has its root in the verb bhaj,
which is used when there is need of service. The English word “worship”
cannot be used in the same sense as bhaj. Worship means to adore, or to show
respect and honor to the worthy one. But service with love and faith is
especially meant for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can avoid
worshiping a respectable man or a demigod and may be called discourteous, but
one cannot avoid serving the Supreme Lord without being thoroughly
condemned. Every living entity is part and parcel of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and thus every living entity is intended to serve the Supreme
Lord by his own constitution. Failing to do this, he falls down. The
Bhagavatam (11.5.3) confirms this as follows:

ya esc‘tm pumsam saksc‘td
citma-prabhavam is’varam



ha bhajcmty avajc‘mcmti
sthc‘mc‘td bhrastc‘th patcmty adhah

“Anyone who does not render service and neglects his duty unto the
primeval Lord, who is the source of all living entities, will certainly fall down
from his constitutional position.”

In this verse also the word bhajcmti is used. Therefore, bhajcmti is applicable
to the Supreme Lord only, whereas the word “worship” can be applied to
demigods or to any other common living entity. The word avajc'mcmti, used in
this verse of Srimad—Bhagavatam, is also found in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Avajc‘mcmti
mam mﬁdhc‘th: “Only the fools and rascals deride the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Krsna.” Such fools take it upon themselves to write
commentaries on the Bhagavad-gitc‘t without an attitude of service to the Lord.
Consequently they cannot properly distinguish between the word bhajcmti and
the word “worship.”

The culmination of all kinds of yoga practices lies in bhakti yoga. All other
yogas are but means to come to the point of bhakti in bhakti—yoga. Yoga actually
means bhakti-yoga; all other yogas are progressions toward the destination of
bhakti—yoga. From the beginning of karma—yoga to the end of bhakti-yoga is a
long way to self-realization. Karma-yoga, without fruitive results, is the
beginning of this path. When karma-yoga increases in knowledge and
renunciation, the stage is called jﬁc‘ma—yoga. When jﬁc‘ma—yoga increases in
meditation on the Supersoul by different physical processes, and the mind is
on Him, it is called astahga—yoga. And when one surpasses the astc‘mga—yoga
and comes to the point of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna, it is
called bhakti yoga, the culmination. Factually, bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal,
but to analyze bhakti-yoga minutely one has to understand these other yogas.
The yogi who is progressive is therefore on the true path of eternal good
fortune. One who sticks to a particular point and does not make further
progress is called by that particular name: karma—yogi, jﬁc‘ma—yogi or
dhyc‘ma—yogi, rc‘tja—yogi, hatha—yogi, etc. If one is fortunate enough to come to the
point of bhakti-yoga, it is to be understood that he has surpassed all other yogas.
Therefore, to become Krsna conscious is the highest stage of yoga, just as,
when we speak of Himalayan, we refer to the world’s highest mountains, of



which the highest peak, Mount Everest, is considered to be the culmination.

It is by great fortune that one comes to Krsna consciousness on the path of
bhakti-yoga to become well situated according to the Vedic direction. The ideal
yogi concentrates his attention on Krsna, who is called Syamasundara, who is
as beautifully colored as a cloud, whose lotuslike face is as effulgent as the sun,
whose dress is brilliant with jewels and whose body is ﬂower-garlanded.
Illuminating all sides is His gorgeous luster, which is called the brahmajyoti. He
incarnates in different forms such as Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha and Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He descends like a human being, as the
son of mother Yas’oda, and He is known as Krsna, Govinda and Vasudeva. He
is the perfect child, husband, friend and master, and He is full with all
opulences and transcendental qualities. If one remains fully conscious of these
features of the Lord, he is called the highest yogi.

This stage of highest perfection in yoga can be attained only by bhakti-yoga,
as is confirmed in all Vedic literature:

yasya deve para bhaktir

yathc‘t deve tathd gurau
tasyaite kathitc‘t hy arthc‘th
prakc‘ts’ahte mahc‘ttmahah

“Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord and
the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge automatically
revealed.” [8U 6.23(526)]

Bhaktir asya bhajaham tad ihamutropc‘tdhimaimsyehc‘tmusmih
mahah—kalpaham, etad eva haiskarmyam. “Bhakti means devotional service to
the Lord which is free from desire for material profit, either in this life or in
the next. Devoid of such inclinations, one should fully absorb the mind in the
Supreme. That is the purpose of haiskarmya.” (Gopéla-tépam‘ Upam'saa 1.15)

These are some of the means for performance of bhakti, or Krsna
consciousness, the highest perfectional stage of the yoga system.

Thus end the Bhaktivedahta Purports to the Sixth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Dhyc‘ma—yoga.



Knowledge of the Absolute

 

TEXT 1

Wzmeiﬁiﬁwawn
mmmamamﬁaagvlmu

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
mayy asakta—mahc‘th pc‘wtha
yogam yuﬁjah mad—c‘ts’rayah
asams’ayam samagram mam
yathc‘t jﬁc‘tsyasi tac chrhu

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Lord said; mayi—to Me;
asakta-mahc‘th—mind attached; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha;
yogam—self-realization; yuﬁjah—practicing; mat—c‘ts’rayah—in consciousness of
Me (Krsna consciousness); asams’ayam—without doubt;
samagram—completely; mcim—Me; yathc‘t—how; jﬁc‘tsyasi—you can know;
tat—that; s’rhu—try to hear.

TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Now hear, 0 son of Prtha, how



by practicing yoga in full consciousness of Me, With mind attached to Me, you
can know Me in full, free from doubt.

PURPORT

In this Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the nature of Krsna
consciousness is fully described. Krsna is full in all opulences, and how He
manifests such opulences is described herein. Also, four kinds of fortunate
people who become attached to Krsna and four kinds of unfortunate people
who never take to Krsna are described in this chapter.

In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the living entity has been
described as nonmaterial spirit soul capable of elevating himself to
self-realization by different types of yogas. At the end of the Sixth Chapter, it
has been clearly stated that the steady concentration of the mind upon Krsna,
or in other words Krsna consciousness, is the highest form of all yoga. By
concentrating one’s mind upon Krsna, one is able to know the Absolute Truth
completely, but not otherwise. Impersonal brahmajyoti or localized Paramatma
realization is not perfect knowledge of the Absolute Truth, because it is
partial. Full and scientific knowledge is Krsna, and everything is revealed to
the person in Krsna consciousness. In complete Krsna consciousness one
knows that Krsna is ultimate knowledge beyond any doubts. Different types of
yoga are only steppingstones on the path of Krsna consciousness. One who
takes directly to Krsna consciousness automatically knows about brahmajyoti
and Paramatma in full. By practice of Krsna consciousness yoga, one can know
everything in full—namely the Absolute Truth, the living entities, the
material nature, and their manifestations with paraphernalia.

One should therefore begin yoga practice as directed in the last verse of the
Sixth Chapter. Concentration of the mind upon Krsna the Supreme is made
possible by prescribed devotional service in nine different forms, of which
s’ravaham is the first and most important. The Lord therefore says to Arjuna,
tac Chmu, or “Hear from Me.” No one can be a greater authority than Krsna,
and therefore by hearing from Him one receives the greatest opportunity to
become a perfectly Krsna conscious person. One has therefore to learn from



Krsna directly or from a pure devotee of Krsna—and not from a nondevotee
upstart, puffed up with academic education.

In the Srimad-Bhagavatam this process of understanding Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is described in the
Second Chapter of the First Canto as follows:

s’rhvatc‘tm sva-kathc‘th krshah
punya—s’ravaha—kirtahah
hrdy antah—stho hy abhadrc‘mi
Uidhuhoti suhrt satc‘tm

hasta—prc‘tyesv abhadresu
hityam bhagavata—sevayc‘t
bhagavaty uttama—s’loke
bhaktir bhavati haisthiki

tadc‘t rajas—tamo—bhcivc‘th
kama—lobhc‘tdayas’ ca ye
ceta etair ahaviddham

sthitam sattve prasidati

evam prasanna—manaso
bhagavad-bhakti—yogatah
bhagavat—tattva-vijﬁc‘mam

mukta—sahgasya jayate

bhidyate hrdaya—grcmthis’
chidycmte sarva—sams’aycih
ksiycmte cc‘tsya karmahi
drsta evc‘ttmahis’vare

“To hear about Krsna from Vedic literatures, or to hear from Him directly
through the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, is itself righteous activity. And for one who hears
about Krsna, Lord Krsna, who is dwelling in everyone’s heart, acts as a
best-wishing friend and purifies the devotee who constantly engages in
hearing of Him. In this way, a devotee naturally develops his dormant



transcendental knowledge. As he hears more about Krsna from the
Bhagavatam and from the devotees, he becomes fixed in the devotional service
of the Lord. By development of devotional service one becomes freed from the
modes of passion and ignorance, and thus material lusts and avarice are
diminished. When these impurities are wiped away, the candidate remains
steady in his position of pure goodness, becomes enlivened by devotional
service and understands the science of God perfectly. Thus bhakti-yoga severs
the hard knot of material affection and enables one to come at once to the
stage of asams’ayam—samagram, understanding of the Supreme Absolute Truth
Personality of Godhead.” (Bbég. 1.2.17—21)

Therefore only by hearing from Krsna or from His devotee in Krsna
consciousness can one understand the science of Krsna.

TEXT 2

aﬁﬁsa‘HﬁIsmfﬁe'ammﬁﬁazl
Wﬁeﬂswﬁmﬁuqu

jﬁc‘mam te ’ham sa—Uijﬁc‘mam
idam vaksyc‘tmy as’esatah
yaj jﬁc‘ttvc‘t heha bhﬁyo ’hyaj
jﬁc‘ttavyam avas’isyate

SYNONYMS

jﬁc‘mam—phenomenal knowledge; te—unto you; aham—I; sa—with;
vijhc‘mam—numinous knowledge; idam—this; vaksyc‘tmi—shall explain;
as’esatah—in full; yat—which; jﬁc‘ttvc‘t—knowing; ha—not; iha—in this world;
bhﬁyah—further; anyat—anything more; jhc‘ttavyam—knowable;
avas’isyate—remains.

TRANSLATION

I shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge, both phenomenal and



numinous. This being known, nothing further shall remain for you to know.

PURPORT

Complete knowledge includes knowledge of the phenomenal world, the
spirit behind it, and the source of both of them. This is transcendental
knowledge. The Lord wants to explain the above-mentioned system of
knowledge because Arjuna is Krsna’s confidential devotee and friend. In the
beginning of the Fourth Chapter this explanation was given by the Lord, and
it is again confirmed here: complete knowledge can be achieved only by the
devotee of the Lord in disciplic succession directly from the Lord. Therefore
one should be intelligent enough to know the source of all knowledge, who is
the cause of all causes and the only object for meditation in all types of yoga
practice. When the cause of all causes becomes known, then everything
knowable becomes known, and nothing remains unknown. The Vedas
(Mandala Upam'saa 1.3) say, kasmih bhagcwo vijﬁc‘tte sarvam idam vijﬁc‘ttam
bhavati.

TEXT 3

WWWWI
mmmmaﬁramzuau

manusyc‘mc‘tm sahasresu
kas’cid yatati siddhaye
yatatc‘tm api siddhc‘mc‘tm
kas’cih mam vetti tattvatah

SYNONYMS

manusyc‘mc‘tm—of men; sahasresu—out of many thousands; kas’cit—someone;
yatati—endeavors; siddhaye—for perfection; yatatc‘tm—of those so
endeavoring; api—indeed; siddhc‘mc‘tm—of those who have achieved
perfection; kas’cit—someone; mam—Me; vetti—does know; tattvatah—in fact.



TRANSLATION

Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and of
those Who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.

PURPORT

There are various grades of men, and out of many thousands, one may be
sufficiently interested in transcendental realization to try to know what is the
self, what is the body, and what is the Absolute Truth. Generally mankind is
simply engaged in the animal propensities, namely eating, sleeping, defending
and mating, and hardly anyone is interested in transcendental knowledge. The
first six chapters of the Gitc't are meant for those who are interested in
transcendental knowledge, in understanding the self, the Superself and the
process of realization by jﬁc‘ma-yoga, dhyc‘ma—yoga and discrimination of the self
from matter. However, Krsna can be known only by persons who are in Krsna
consciousness. Other transcendentalists may achieve impersonal Brahman
realization, for this is easier than understanding Krsna. Krsna is the Supreme
Person, but at the same time He is beyond the knowledge of Brahman and
Paramatma. The yogis and jﬁc‘mis are confused in their attempts to understand
Krsna. Although the greatest of the impersonalists, Sripada Sankaracarya, has
admitted in his Gitc't commentary that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, his followers do not accept Krsna as such, for it is very difficult to
know Krsna, even though one has transcendental realization of impersonal
Brahman.

Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes, the
primeval Lord Govinda. Is’varah paramah krshah sac-cid—c‘mahda—vigrahah/
ahadir adir govindah sarva-kc‘waha-kc‘tmham. It is very difficult for the
nondevotees to know Him. Although nondevotees declare that the path of
bhakti, or devotional service, is very easy, they cannot practice it. If the path of
bhakti is so easy, as the nondevotee class of men proclaim, then why do they
take up the difficult path? Actually the path of bhakti is not easy. The so-called
path of bhakti practiced by unauthorized persons without knowledge of bhakti



may be easy, but when it is practiced factually according to the rules and
regulations, the speculative scholars and philosophers fall away from the path.
Srila Rfipa Gosvami writes in his Bbakti-rasﬁmrta-smdbu (1.2.101):

s’mti—smrti-pmc‘mc‘tdi—
paﬁcarc‘ttra—vidhim vihc‘t
aikc‘mtiki hater bhaktir
utpc‘ttc‘tyaiva kalpate

“Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic
literatures like the Upcmisads, Purc‘mas and Narada—paﬁcarc‘ttm is simply an
unnecessary disturbance in society.”

It is not possible for the Brahman-realized impersonalist or the
Paramatma-realized yogi to understand Krsna the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the son of mother Yas’oda or the charioteer of Arjuna. Even the
great demigods are sometimes confused about Krsna (muhyahti yat sﬁrayah).
Mam tu veda ha kas’ccma: “No one knows Me as I am,” the Lord says. And if
one does know Him, then sa mahc‘ttmc‘t su-dmlabhah. “Such a great soul is very
rare.” Therefore unless one practices devotional service to the Lord, one
cannot know Krsna as He is (tattvatah), even though one is a great scholar or
philosopher. Only the pure devotees can know something of the inconceivable
transcendental qualities in Krsna, in the cause of all causes, in His
omnipotence and opulence, and in His wealth, fame, strength, beauty,
knowledge and renunciation, because Krsna is benevolently inclined to His
devotees. He is the last word in Brahman realization, and the devotees alone
can realize Him as He is. Therefore it is said:

atah s’ri-krsha—m‘tmc‘tdi
ha bhaved grahyam ihdriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvc‘tdau
svayam eva sphmaty adah

“No one can understand Krsna as He is by the blunt material senses. But He
reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their
transcendental loving service unto Him.” (Bbakti—rasémrta-smdbu 1.2.234)



TEXT 4

WSszlailﬁrgﬁﬁaal
WWﬁfﬁmmueu

bhﬁmir cipo ’halo vc‘tyuh
kham memo buddhir eva ca
ahahkc‘tra itiyam me
bhihhc‘t prakrtir astadhc‘t

SYNONYMS

bhﬁmih—earth; cipah—water; ahalah—fire; Uayuh—air; kham—ether;
mahah—mind; buddhih—intelligence; eva—certainly; ca—and;
ahahkc‘wah—false ego; iti—thus; iyam—all these; me—My; bhihhc‘I—separated;
prakrtih—energies; astadhc‘I—eightfold.

TRANSLATION

Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—all together
these eight constitute My separated material energies.

PURPORT

The science of God analyzes the constitutional position of God and His
diverse energies. Material nature is called prakrti, or the energy of the Lord in
His different pumsa incarnations (expansions) as described in the
Scitvata—tahtra:

vishos tu trihi rﬁpahi
purusc‘tkhyc‘my atho viduh
ekam tu mahatah srastr
dvitiyam tv ahda—samsthitam
trtiyam sarva—bhﬁta—stham



tc‘mi jﬁc‘ttvc‘t vimucyate

“For material creation, Lord Krsna’s plenary expansion assumes three
Visnus. The first one, Maha-Visnu, creates the total material energy, known as
the mahat-tattva. The second, Garbhodakas’ayi Visnu, enters into all the
universes to create diversities in each of them. The third, Ksirodakas’ayi Visnu,
is diffused as the all-pervading Supersoul in all the universes and is known as
Paramatma. He is present even within the atoms. Anyone who knows these
three Visnus can be liberated from material entanglement.”

This material world is a temporary manifestation of one of the energies of
the Lord. All the activities of the material world are directed by these three
Visnu expansions of Lord Krsna. These pumsas are called incarnations.
Generally one who does not know the science of God (Krsna) assumes that
this material world is for the enjoyment of the living entities and that the
living entities are the pumsas—the causes, controllers and enjoyers of the
material energy. According to Bhagavad-gitc‘t this atheistic conclusion is false.
In the verse under discussion it is stated that Krsna is the original cause of the
material manifestation. Srimad-Bhagavatam also confirms this. The ingredients
of the material manifestation are separated energies of the Lord. Even the
brahmajyoti, which is the ultimate goal of the impersonalists, is a spiritual
energy manifested in the spiritual sky. There are no spiritual diversities in the
brahmajyoti as there are in the Vaikunthalokas, and the impersonalist accepts
this brahmajyoti as the ultimate eternal goal. The Paramatma manifestation is
also a temporary all-pervasive aspect of the Ksirodakas’ayi Visnu. The
Paramatma manifestation is not eternal in the spiritual world. Therefore the
factual Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna. He is
the complete energetic person, and He possesses different separated and
internal energies.

In the material energy, the principal manifestations are eight, as above
mentioned. Out of these, the first five manifestations, namely earth, water,
fire, air and sky, are called the five gigantic creations or the gross creations,
within which the five sense objects are included. They are the manifestations
of physical sound, touch, form, taste and smell. Material science comprises
these ten items and nothing more. But the other three items, namely mind,



intelligence and false ego, are neglected by the materialists. Philosophers who
deal with mental activities are also not perfect in knowledge because they do
not know the ultimate source, Krsna. The false ego—“I am,” and “It is mine,
which constitute the basic principle of material existence—includes ten sense
organs for material activities. Intelligence refers to the total material creation,
called the mahat-tattva. Therefore from the eight separated energies of the
Lord are manifest the twenty-four elements of the material world, which are
the subject matter of Sankhya atheistic philosophy; they are originally
offshoots from Krsna’s energies and are separated from Him, but atheistic
Sankhya philosophers with a poor fund of knowledge do not know Krsna as
the cause of all causes. The subject matter for discussion in the Sankhya
philosophy is only the manifestation of the external energy of Krsna, as it is
described in the Bhagavad—gitc‘t.

TEXT 5
WWﬁﬁiﬁml
WWWWWMII

apareyam itas tv anyc‘tm
prakrtim viddhi me parc‘tm

jiva-bhﬁtc‘tm mahc‘I-bc‘tho

yayedam dhc‘tryate jagat

SYNONYMS

aparc‘t—inferior; iyam—this; itah—besides this; tu—but; anyam—another;
prakrtim—energy; Uiddhi—just try to understand; me—My; param—superior;
jiva-bhﬁtc‘tm—comprising the living entities; mahc‘t-bc‘tho—O mighty-armed
one; yayc‘t—by whom; idam—this; dhc‘tryate—is utilized or exploited; jagat—the
material world.

TRANSLATION



Besides these, 0 mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another, superior energy of
Mine, Which comprises the living entities Who are exploiting the resources of
this material, inferior nature.

PURPORT

Here it is clearly mentioned that living entities belong to the superior
nature (or energY) of the Supreme Lord. The inferior energy is matter
manifested in different elements, namely earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind,
intelligence and false ego. Both forms of material nature, namely gross (earth,
etc.) and subtle (mind, etc.), are products of the inferior energy. The living
entities, who are exploiting these inferior energies for different purposes, are
the superior energy of the Supreme Lord, and it is due to this energy that the
entire material world functions. The cosmic manifestation has no power to act
unless it is moved by the superior energy, the living entity. Energies are always
controlled by the energetic, and therefore the living entities are always
controlled by the Lord—they have no independent existence. They are never
equally powerful, as unintelligent men think. The distinction between the
living entities and the Lord is described in grimad-Bbégavatam (10.87.30) as
follows:

aparimitd dhruvc‘ts tcmu-bhrto yadi sarva—gatc‘ts
tarhi ha s’c‘tsyateti m'yamo dhruva hetarathc‘t
ajam' ca yah-mayam tad avimucya m'ycmtr bhavet
samam anujc‘matc‘tm yad amatam mata-dustatayci

“0 Supreme Eternal! If the embodied living entities were eternal and
all-pervading like You, then they would not be under Your control. But if the
living entities are accepted as minute energies of Your Lordship, then they are
at once subject to Your supreme control. Therefore real liberation entails
surrender by the living entities to Your control, and that surrender will make
them happy. In that constitutional position only can they be controllers.
Therefore, men with limited knowledge who advocate the monistic theory that
God and the living entities are equal in all respects are actually guided by a



faulty and polluted opinion.”

The Supreme Lord, Krsna, is the only controller, and all living entities are
controlled by Him. These living entities are His superior energy because the
quality of their existence is one and the same with the Supreme, but they are
never equal to the Lord in quantity of power. While exploiting the gross and
subtle inferior energy (matter), the superior energy (the living entity) forgets
his real spiritual mind and intelligence. This forgetfulness is due to the
inﬂuence of matter upon the living entity. But when the living entity becomes
free from the influence of the illusory material energy, he attains the stage
called mukti, or liberation. The false ego, under the inﬂuence of material
illusion, thinks, “I am matter, and material acquisitions are mine.” His actual
position is realized when he is liberated from all material ideas, including the
conception of his becoming one in all respects with God. Therefore one may
conclude that the Gitc't confirms the living entity to be only one of the
multi-energies of Krsna; and when this energy is freed from material
contamination, it becomes fully Krsna conscious, or liberated.

TEXT 6

Wiﬁﬁmiuﬁqml

ﬁwmtmtﬂm‘WllSll

etad—yonihi thZtc‘mi
sarvc‘mity upadhdraya
aham krtshasya jagatah
prabhavah pralayas tathd

SYNONYMS

etat—these two natures; yonihi—whose source of birth; bhﬁtc'mi—everything
created; sarvc‘mi—all; iti—thus; upadhc‘traya—know; aham—I;
krtshasya—all-inclusive; jagatah—of the world; prabhavah—the source of
manifestation; pralayah—annihilation; tathc't—as well as.



TRANSLATION

All created beings have their source in these two natures. Of all that is
material and all that is spiritual in this world, know for certain that I am both
the origin and the dissolution.

PURPORT

Everything that exists is a product of matter and spirit. Spirit is the basic
field of creation, and matter is created by spirit. Spirit is not created at a
certain stage of material development. Rather, this material world is
manifested only on the basis of spiritual energy. This material body is
developed because spirit is present within matter; a child grows gradually to
boyhood and then to manhood because that superior energy, spirit soul, is
present. Similarly, the entire cosmic manifestation of the gigantic universe is
developed because of the presence of the Supersoul, Visnu. Therefore spirit
and matter, which combine to manifest this gigantic universal form, are
originally two energies of the Lord, and consequently the Lord is the original
cause of everything. A fragmental part and parcel of the Lord, namely the
living entity, may be the cause of a big skyscraper, a big factory, or even a big
city, but he cannot be the cause of a big universe. The cause of the big universe
is the big soul, or the Supersoul. And Krsna, the Supreme, is the cause of both
the big and small souls. Therefore He is the original cause of all causes. This is
confirmed in the Karlie Upam'saa (2.2.13). Nityo hitycmc‘tm cetcmas’ cetahc‘mc‘tm.

TEXT 7

ﬁtWWmWI
trﬁraaiiha‘qiefqatrfﬁnwnsaueu

mattah parataram nc‘myat
kiﬁcid asti dhahaﬁjaya
mayi sarvam idam protam



sIZtre mahi—gahc‘t iva

SYNONYMS

mattah—beyond Me; para—taram—superior; ha—not; anyat kiﬁcit—anything
else; asti—there is; dhahaﬁjaya—O conqueror of wealth; mayi—in Me;
sarvam—all that be; idam—which we see; protam—is strung; sIZtre—on a
thread; mahi—gahc‘th—pearls; iva—like.

TRANSLATION

O conqueror of wealth, there is no truth superior to Me. Everything rests
upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.

PURPORT

There is a common controversy over whether the Supreme Absolute Truth
is personal or impersonal. As far as Bhagavad-gitc‘t is concerned, the Absolute
Truth is the Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, and this is confirmed in every
step. In this verse, in particular, it is stressed that the Absolute Truth is a
person. That the Personality of Godhead is the Supreme Absolute Truth is also
the affirmation of the Brahma—samhitc‘t: is’varah paramah krshah
sac—cid-c‘mahda-vigrahah; that is, the Supreme Absolute Truth Personality of
Godhead is Lord Krsna, who is the primeval Lord, the reservoir of all pleasure,
Govinda, and the eternal form of complete bliss and knowledge. These
authorities leave no doubt that the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person, the
cause of all causes. The impersonalist, however, argues on the strength of the
Vedic version given in the §Vetés’vatara Upam'saa (3.10): tato yad uttamtaram
tad arﬁpam ahamayam/ ya etad vidm amrtds te bhavcmti athetare duhkham
evc‘tpiyahti. “In the material world Brahma, the primeval living entity within
the universe, is understood to be the supreme amongst the demigods, human
beings and lower animals. But beyond Brahma there is the Transcendence,
who has no material form and is free from all material contaminations.
Anyone who can know Him also becomes transcendental, but those who do



not know Him suffer the miseries of the material world.”

The impersonalist puts more stress on the word arﬁpam. But this arﬁpam is
not impersonal. It indicates the transcendental form of eternity, bliss and
knowledge as described in the Bmhma-samhita quoted above. Other verses in
the gvetéswatara Upam'saa (3.8—9) substantiate this as follows:

vedaham etam purusam mahc‘mtam
aditya-vamam tamasah parastc‘tt
tam eva Uiditvc‘tti mrtyum eti
hc‘myah panthc‘t vidyate ’ycmc‘tya

yasmc‘tt param haparam asti kiﬁcid
yasmc‘m hc‘miyo ho jyc‘Iyo ’sti kiﬁcit
vrksa iva stabdho divi tisthaty ekas
tehedam pﬁmam puruseha sarvam

“I know that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is transcendental to all
material conceptions of darkness. Only he who knows Him can transcend the
bonds of birth and death. There is no way for liberation other than this
knowledge of that Supreme Person.

“There is no truth superior to that Supreme Person, because He is the
supermost. He is smaller than the smallest, and He is greater than the greatest.
He is situated as a silent tree, and He illumines the transcendental sky, and as
a tree spreads its roots, He spreads His extensive energies.”

From these verses one concludes that the Supreme Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is all-pervading by His multi-energies,
both material and spiritual.

TEXT 8

mmﬁﬁmaﬁwﬁﬁzl
Wzaéaﬁgaazﬁﬁeﬁﬁuw

raso ’ham apsu kauhteya



prabhc‘tsmi s’as’i-smyayoh
prahavah sarva—vedesu
s’abdah khe pamusam msu

SYNONYMS

rasah—taste; aham—I; apsu—in water; kauhteya—O son of Kunti;
prabhc‘I—the light; asmi—I am; s’as’i—smyayoh—of the moon and the sun;
prahavah—the three letters a—u-m; sarva—in all; vedesu—the Vedas;
s’abdah—sound Vibration; khe—in the ether; paumsam—ability; msu—in
men.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Kunti, I am the taste of water, the light of the sun and the moon,
the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in ether and ability in
man.

PURPORT

This verse explains how the Lord is all-pervasive by His diverse material
and spiritual energies. The Supreme Lord can be preliminarily perceived by
His different energies, and in this way He is realized impersonally. As the
demigod in the sun is a person and is perceived by his all-pervading energy, the
sunshine, so the Lord, although in His eternal abode, is perceived by His
all-pervading diffusive energies. The taste of water is the active principle of
water. No one likes to drink sea water, because the pure taste of water is mixed
with salt. Attraction for water depends on the purity of the taste, and this pure
taste is one of the energies of the Lord. The impersonalist perceives the
presence of the Lord in water by its taste, and the personalist also glorifies the
Lord for His kindly supplying tasty water to quench man’s thirst. That is the
way of perceiving the Supreme. Practically speaking, there is no conﬂict
between personalism and impersonalism. One who knows God knows that the
impersonal conception and personal conception are simultaneously present in



everything and that there is no contradiction. Therefore Lord Caitanya
established His sublime doctrine: acihtya
bheda-and-abheda-tattUa—simultaneous oneness and difference.

The light of the sun and the moon is also originally emanating from the
brahmajyoti, which is the impersonal effulgence of the Lord. And prahava, or
the omkc'n'a transcendental sound in the beginning of every Vedic hymn,
addresses the Supreme Lord. Because the impersonalists are very much afraid
of addressing the Supreme Lord Krsna by His innumerable names, they prefer
to Vibrate the transcendental sound omkc'n'a. But they do not realize that
omkc'n'a is the sound representation of Krsna. The jurisdiction of Krsna
consciousness extends everywhere, and one who knows Krsna consciousness is
blessed. Those who do not know Krsna are in illusion, and so knowledge of
Krsna is liberation, and ignorance of Him is bondage.

TEXT 9

WW:WE§HWWI
aiaﬁaéﬁgaqarﬁqaqﬁsﬁusu

punyo gahdhah prthivyc‘tm ca
tejas’ cc‘Ismi Uibhc‘wasau
jivaham sarva-bhﬁtesu
tapas” cc‘Ismi tapasvisu

SYNONYMS
punyah—original; gahdhah—fragrance; prthivyc‘tm—in the earth; ca—also;
tejah—heat; ca—also; asmi—I am; vibhc‘wasau—in the fire; jivcmam—life;
sarva—in all; thZtesu—living entities; tapah—penance; ca—also; asmi—I am;
tapasvisu—in those who practice penance.
TRANSLATION

I am the original fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I am the



life of all that lives, and I am the penances of all ascetics.

PURPORT

Punya means that which is not decomposed; punya is original. Everything in
the material world has a certain flavor or fragrance, as the ﬂavor and fragrance
in a flower, or in the earth, in water, in fire, in air, etc. The uncontaminated
ﬂavor, the original ﬂavor, which permeates everything, is Krsna. Similarly,
everything has a particular original taste, and this taste can be changed by the
mixture of chemicals. So everything original has some smell, some fragrance,
and some taste. Vibhc‘wasu means fire. Without fire we cannot run factories, we
cannot cook, etc., and that fire is Krsna. The heat in the fire is Krsna.
According to Vedic medicine, indigestion is due to a low temperature in the
belly. So even for digestion fire is needed. In Krsna consciousness we become
aware that earth, water, fire, air and every active principle, all chemicals and
all material elements are due to Krsna. The duration of man’s life is also due to
Krsna. Therefore by the grace of Krsna, man can prolong his life or diminish
it. So Krsna consciousness is active in every sphere.

TEXT 10

aisinfaahﬁmiﬁrﬁmeiml
WWW" 9o ||

bijam mam sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm
viddhi pc‘wtha sahdtcmam
buddhir buddhimatc‘tm asmi
tejas tejasvihc‘tm aham

SYNONYMS

bijam—the seed; mam—Me; sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm—of all living entities;
Uiddhi—try to understand; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha; sahataham—original,
eternal; buddhih—intelligence; buddhi-matc'tm—of the intelligent; asmi—I am;



tejah—prowess; tejasvihc‘tm—of the powerful; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the
intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.

PURPORT

Bijam means seed; Krsna is the seed of everything. There are various living
entities, movable and inert. Birds, beasts, men and many other living creatures
are moving living entities; trees and plants, however, are inert—they cannot
move, but only stand. Every entity is contained within the scope of 8,400,000
species of life; some of them are moving and some of them are inert. In all
cases, however, the seed of their life is Krsna. As stated in Vedic literature,
Brahman, or the Supreme Absolute Truth, is that from which everything is
emanating. Krsna is Parabrahman, the Supreme Spirit. Brahman is impersonal
and Parabrahman is personal. Impersonal Brahman is situated in the personal
aspect—that is stated in Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Therefore, originally, Krsna is the
source of everything. He is the root. As the root of a tree maintains the whole
tree, Krsna, being the original root of all things, maintains everything in this
material manifestation. This is also confirmed in the Vedic literature (Katha

Upam'saa 2.2.13):

m'tyo hitycmc‘tm cetcmas’ cetahc‘mc‘tm
eko bahﬁnc‘tm yo vidadhc‘tti kaman

He is the prime eternal among all eternals. He is the supreme living entity
of all living entities, and He alone is maintaining all life. One cannot do
anything without intelligence, and Krsna also says that He is the root of all
intelligence. Unless a person is intelligent he cannot understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna.

TEXT 11



Hewetaﬁwrﬁaﬁiml
Wiﬁﬁmﬁiﬁqmﬁiu 99 ||

balam balavatc‘tm cc‘tham
kama-rc‘tga—vivarjitam

dharmc‘wimddho thZtesu

kamo ’smi bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

balam—strength; bala—vatc‘tm—of the strong; ca—and; aham—I am;
kama—passion; rc‘tga—and attachment; vivarjitam—devoid of;
dharma—aviruddhah—not against religious principles; thZtesu—in all beings;
kamah—sex life; asmi—I am; bharata—Tsabha—O lord of the Bharatas.

TRANSLATION

I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am seX life
Which is not contrary to religious principles, 0 lord of the Bharatas [Arjuna].

PURPORT

The strong man’s strength should be applied to protect the weak, not for
personal aggression. Similarly, sex life, according to religious principles
(dharma), should be for the propagation of children, not otherwise. The
responsibility of parents is then to make their offspring Krsna conscious.

TEXT 12

ﬁﬁaarﬁammmnmaﬁl
Wmmﬁmﬁﬁqﬁruwu

ye caiva sc‘Ittvikc‘I bhc‘wc‘t
rc‘tjasc‘ts tc‘tmasc‘ts’ ca ye



matta eveti tc‘m viddhi
ha tv aham tesu te mayi

SYNONYMS

ye—all which; ca—and; eva—certainly; scittvikcih—in goodness;
bhc‘wc‘th—states of being; Tajasc'th—in the mode of passion; tc'tmasc'th—in the
mode of ignorance; ca—also; ye—all which; mattah—from Me; eva—certainly;
iti—thus; tc‘m—those; Uiddhi—try to know; ha—not; tu—but; aham—I;
tesu—in them; te—they; mayi—in Me.

TRANSLATION

Know that all states of being—be they of goodness, passion or
ignorance—are manifested by My energy. I am, in one sense, everything, but I
am independent. I am not under the modes of material nature, for they, on the
contrary, are Within Me.

PURPORT

All material activities in the world are being conducted under the three
modes of material nature. Although these material modes of nature are
emanations from the Supreme Lord, Krsna, He is not subject to them. For
instance, under the state laws one may be punished, but the king, the
lawmaker, is not subject to that law. Similarly, all the modes of material
nature—goodness, passion and ignorance—are emanations from the Supreme
Lord, Krsna, but Krsna is not subject to material nature. Therefore He is
hirguha, which means that these guhas, or modes, although issuing from Him,
do not affect Him. That is one of the special characteristics of Bhagavan, or
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 13

Wztﬁiﬁa’ml



WWW: WM 93 ||

tribhir guha—mayair bhc‘wair
ebhih sarvam idam jagat
mohitam habhijc‘mciti
mam ebhyah param avyayam

SYNONYMS

tribhih—three; guha-mayaih—consisting of the guhas; bhc‘waih—by the states
of being; ebhih—all these; sarvam—whole; idam—this; jagat—universe;
mohitam—deluded; ha abhijc‘mciti—does not know; mcim—Me; ebhyah—above
these; param—the Supreme; avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

Deluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the Whole
world does not know Me, Who am above the modes and inexhaustible.

PURPORT

The whole world is enchanted by three modes of material nature. Those
who are bewildered by these three modes cannot understand that
transcendental to this material nature is the Supreme Lord, Krsna.

Every living entity under the inﬂuence of material nature has a particular
type of body and a particular type of psychological and biological activities
accordingly. There are four classes of men functioning in the three material
modes of nature. Those who are purely in the mode of goodness are called
brc‘thmahas. Those who are purely in the mode of passion are called ksatriyas.
Those who are in the modes of both passion and ignorance are called vais’yas.
Those who are completely in ignorance are called s’ﬁdras. And those who are
less than that are animals or animal life. However, these designations are not
permanent. I may either be a brdhmaha, ksatriya. vais’ya or whatever—in any
case, this life is temporary. But although life is temporary and we do not know



what we are going to be in the next life, by the spell of this illusory energy we
consider ourselves in terms of this bodily conception of life, and we thus think
that we are American, Indian, Russian, or brc‘thmaha. Hindu, Muslim, etc. And
if we become entangled with the modes of material nature, then we forget the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is behind all these modes. 80 Lord Krsna
says that living entities deluded by these three modes of nature do not
understand that behind the material background is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

There are many different kinds of living entities—human beings, demigods,
animals, etc.—and each and every one of them is under the inﬂuence of
material nature, and all of them have forgotten the transcendent Personality
of Godhead. Those who are in the modes of passion and ignorance, and even
those who are in the mode of goodness, cannot go beyond the impersonal
Brahman conception of the Absolute Truth. They are bewildered before the
Supreme Lord in His personal feature, which possesses all beauty, opulence,
knowledge, strength, fame and renunciation. When even those who are in
goodness cannot understand, what hope is there for those in passion and
ignorance? Krsna consciousness is transcendental to all these three modes of
material nature, and those who are truly established in Krsna consciousness
are actually liberated.

TEXT 14

EEHQEITWHHWWI
mﬁaﬁmﬁwﬁﬁmﬁaéuwu

daivi hy esc‘t guha-mayi

mama mciyc‘t duratyayc‘t
mam eva ye prapadyante
mciyc‘tm etc‘tm tarahti te

SYNONYMS



daiUi—transcendental; hi—certainly; esc‘I—this; guha-mayi—consisting of the
three modes of material nature; mama—My; mciyc‘t—energy; duratyayd—very
difficult to overcome; mam—unto Me; eva—certainly; ye—those who;
prapadyahte—surrender; mciyc‘tm etc‘tm—this illusory energy;
tarahti—overcome; te—they.

TRANSLATION

This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature,
is difficult to overcome. But those Who have surrendered unto Me can easily
cross beyond it.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has innumerable energies, and all
these energies are divine. Although the living entities are part of His energies
and are therefore divine, due to contact with material energy their original
superior power is covered. Being thus covered by material energy, one cannot
possibly overcome its inﬂuence. As previously stated, both the material and
spiritual natures, being emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
are eternal. The living entities belong to the eternal superior nature of the
Lord, but due to contamination by the inferior nature, matter, their illusion is
also eternal. The conditioned soul is therefore called hitya-baddha, or eternally
conditioned. No one can trace out the history of his becoming conditioned at a
certain date in material history. Consequently, his release from the clutches of
material nature is very difficult, even though that material nature is an
inferior energy, because material energy is ultimately conducted by the
supreme will, which the living entity cannot overcome. Inferior, material
nature is defined herein as divine nature due to its divine connection and
movement by the divine will. Being conducted by divine will, material nature,
although inferior, acts so wonderfully in the construction and destruction of
the cosmic manifestation. The Vedas confirm this as follows: mciyc'tm tu
prakrtim vidyc‘m mciyiham tu mahes’varam. “Although mciyc‘t [illusion] is false or
temporary, the background of mciyc't is the supreme magician, the Personality of



Godhead, who is Mahes’vara, the supreme controller.” (gvetéivatara Upam'sad
4.10)

Another meaning of guha is rope; it is to be understood that the
conditioned soul is tightly tied by the ropes of illusion. A man bound by the
hands and feet cannot free himself—he must be helped by a person who is
unbound. Because the bound cannot help the bound, the rescuer must be
liberated. Therefore, only Lord Krsna, or His bona fide representative the
spiritual master, can release the conditioned soul. Without such superior help,
one cannot be freed from the bondage of material nature. Devotional service,
or Krsna consciousness, can help one gain such release. Krsna, being the Lord
of illusory energy, can order this insurmountable energy to release the
conditioned soul. He orders this release out of His causeless mercy on the
surrendered soul and out of His paternal affection for the living entity, who is
originally a beloved son of the Lord. Therefore surrender unto the lotus feet of
the Lord is the only means to get free from the clutches of the stringent
material nature.

The words mam eva are also significant. Mam means unto Krsna (Visnu)
only, and not Brahma or Siva. Although Brahma and Siva are greatly elevated
and are almost on the level of Visnu, it is not possible for such incarnations of
rajo—guha (passion) and tamo-guha (ignorance) to release the conditioned soul
from the clutches of mciyc't. In other words, both Brahma and Siva are also
under the inﬂuence of mciyc't. Only Visnu is the master of mciyc't; therefore He
alone can give release to the conditioned soul. The Vedas (gvetéivatara
Upam'saa 3.8) confirm this in the phrase tam eva Uiditvc't. or “Freedom is
possible only by understanding Krsna.” Even Lord Siva affirms that liberation
can be achieved only by the mercy of Visnu. Lord Siva says, mukti-pmdc'ttc‘t
sarvesc‘tm vishm eva ha sams’ayah: “There is no doubt that Visnu is the deliverer
of liberation for everyone.”

TEXT 15

ﬁnfgwgﬁlﬁiﬁei:m%=ﬁmzl



WWWWWWMIWII

ha mam duskrtiho mﬁdhc‘th
prapadyahte haradhamc‘th
mciyayc‘tpahrta—jﬁc‘mc‘t
asuram bhc‘wam cis’ritc‘th

SYNONYMS

ha—not; mam—unto Me; duskrtihah—miscreants; mﬁdhcih—foolish;
prapadyahte—surrender; hara—adhamc‘th—lowest among mankind; mciyayc‘t—by
the illusory energy; apahrta—stolen; jﬁc‘mc‘th—whose knowledge;
asmam—demonic; bhavam—nature; cis’ritdh—accepting.

TRANSLATION

Those miscreants Who are grossly foolish, Who are lowest among mankind,
Whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and Who partake of the atheistic nature
of demons do not surrender unto Me.

PURPORT

It is said in Bhagavad-gitc‘t that simply by surrendering oneself unto the lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality Krsna one can surmount the stringent laws of
material nature. At this point a question arises: How is it that educated
philosophers, scientists, businessmen, administrators and all the leaders of
ordinary men do not surrender to the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, the all-powerful
Personality of Godhead? Mukti, or liberation from the laws of material nature,
is sought by the leaders of mankind in different ways and with great plans and
perseverance for a great many years and births. But if that liberation is possible
by simply surrendering unto the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, then why don’t these intelligent and hard-working leaders adopt this
simple method?

The Gitc't answers this question very frankly. Those really learned leaders of



society like Brahma, Siva, Kapila, the Kumaras, Manu, Vyasa, Devala, Asita,
Janaka, Prahlada, Bali, and later on Madhvacarya, Ramanujacarya, Sri
Caitanya and many others—who are faithful philosophers, politicians,
educators, scientists, etc.—surrender to the lotus feet of the Supreme Person,
the all-powerful authority. Those who are not actually philosophers, scientists,
educators, administrators, etc., but who pose themselves as such for material
gain, do not accept the plan or path of the Supreme Lord. They have no idea
of God; they simply manufacture their own worldly plans and consequently
complicate the problems of material existence in their vain attempts to solve
them. Because material energy (nature) is so powerful, it can resist the
unauthorized plans of the atheists and bafﬂe the knowledge of “planning
commissions.”

The atheistic planmakers are described herein by the word duskrtihah, or
“miscreants.” Krti means one who has performed meritorious work. The atheist
planmaker is sometimes very intelligent and meritorious also, because any
gigantic plan, good or bad, must take intelligence to execute. But because the
atheist’s brain is improperly utilized in opposing the plan of the Supreme Lord,
the atheistic planmaker is called duskrti. which indicates that his intelligence
and efforts are misdirected.

In the Gitc't it is clearly mentioned that material energy works fully under
the direction of the Supreme Lord. It has no independent authority. It works
as the shadow moves, in accordance with the movements of the object. But
still material energy is very powerful, and the atheist, due to his godless
temperament, cannot know how it works; nor can he know the plan of the
Supreme Lord. Under illusion and the modes of passion and ignorance, all his
plans are bafﬂed, as in the case of Hiranyakasipu and Ravana, whose plans
were smashed to dust although they were both materially learned as scientists,
philosophers, administrators and educators. These duskrtihas, or miscreants,
are of four different patterns, as outlined below.

(1) The mﬁdhas are those who are grossly foolish, like hardworking beasts of
burden. They want to enjoy the fruits of their labor by themselves, and so do
not want to part with them for the Supreme. The typical example of the beast
of burden is the ass. This humble beast is made to work very hard by his



master. The ass does not really know for whom he works so hard day and night.
He remains satisfied by filling his stomach with a bundle of grass, sleeping for a
while under fear of being beaten by his master, and satisfying his sex appetite
at the risk of being repeatedly kicked by the opposite party. The ass sings
poetry and philosophy sometimes, but this braying sound only disturbs others.
This is the position of the foolish fruitive worker who does not know for whom
he should work. He does not know that karma (action) is meant for yajﬁa
(sacrifice).

Most often, those who work very hard day and night to clear the burden of
self-created duties say that they have no time to hear of the immortality of the
living being. To such mﬁdhas, material gains, which are destructible, are life’s
all in all—despite the fact that the mﬁdhas enjoy only a very small fraction of
the fruit of labor. Sometimes they spend sleepless days and nights for fruitive
gain, and although they may have ulcers or indigestion, they are satisfied with
practically no food; they are simply absorbed in working hard day and night for
the benefit of illusory masters. Ignorant of their real master, the foolish
workers waste their valuable time serving mammon. Unfortunately, they never
surrender to the supreme master of all masters, nor do they take time to hear of
Him from the proper sources. The swine who eat the night soil do not care to
accept sweetmeats made of sugar and ghee. Similarly, the foolish worker will
untiringly continue to hear of the sense-enjoyable tidings of the flickering
mundane world, but will have very little time to hear about the eternal living
force that moves the material world.

(2) Another class of duskrti, or miscreant, is called the haradhama, or the
lowest of mankind. Nara means human being, and adhama means the lowest.
Out of the 8,400,000 different species of living beings, there are 400,000
human species. Out of these there are numerous lower forms of human life
that are mostly uncivilized. The civilized human beings are those who have
regulative principles of social, political and religious life. Those who are
socially and politically developed but who have no religious principles must be
considered haradhamas. Nor is religion without God religion, because the
purpose of following religious principles is to know the Supreme Truth and
man’s relation with Him. In the Gitc't the Personality of Godhead clearly states



that there is no authority above Him and that He is the Supreme Truth. The
civilized form of human life is meant for man’s reviving the lost consciousness of
his eternal relation with the Supreme Truth, the Personality of Godhead Sri
Krsna, who is all-powerful. Whoever loses this chance is classified as a
haradhama. We get information from revealed scriptures that when the baby is
in the mother’s womb (an extremely uncomfortable situation) he prays to God
for deliverance and promises to worship Him alone as soon as he gets out. To
pray to God when he is in difficulty is a natural instinct in every living being
because he is eternally related with God. But after his deliverance, the child
forgets the difficulties of birth and forgets his deliverer also, being inﬂuenced
by mciyc't, the illusory energy.

It is the duty of the guardians of children to revive the divine consciousness
dormant in them. The ten processes of reformatory ceremonies, as enjoined in
the Mahu-smrti. which is the guide to religious principles, are meant for
reviving God consciousness in the system of vamc'ts’mma. However, no process
is strictly followed now in any part of the world, and therefore 99.9 percent of
the population is haradhama.

When the whole population becomes haradhama. naturally all their
so-called education is made null and void by the all-powerful energy of
physical nature. According to the standard of the Gita, a learned man is he
who sees on equal terms the learned brc‘thmaha. the dog. the cow, the elephant
and the dog-eater. That is the vision of a true devotee. Sri Nityananda Prabhu,
who is the incarnation of Godhead as divine master, delivered the typical
haradhamas. the brothers ]agai and Madhai, and showed how the mercy of a
real devotee is bestowed upon the lowest of mankind. So the haradhama who is
condemned by the Personality of Godhead can again revive his spiritual
consciousness only by the mercy of a devotee.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in propagating the bhagavata-dhai'ma, or
activities of the devotees, has recommended that people submissively hear the
message of the Personality of Godhead. The essence of this message is
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The lowest amongst human beings can be delivered by this
submissive hearing process only, but unfortunately they even refuse to give an
aural reception to these messages, and what to speak of surrendering to the will



of the Supreme Lord? Naradhamas, or the lowest of mankind, will fully neglect
the prime duty of the human being.

(3) The next class of duskrti is called mciyayc‘tpahrta—jﬁcim‘th, or those persons
whose erudite knowledge has been nullified by the influence of illusory
material energy. They are mostly very learned fellows—great philosophers,
poets, literati, scientists, etc.—but the illusory energy misguides them, and
therefore they disobey the Supreme Lord.

There are a great number of mciyayc'tpahrta-jﬁc‘mc‘th at the present moment,
even amongst the scholars of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. In the Gita, in plain and
simple language, it is stated that Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. There is none equal to or greater than Him. He is mentioned as the
father of Brahma, the original father of all human beings. In fact, Sri Krsna is
said to be not only the father of Brahma but also the father of all species of life.
He is the root of the impersonal Brahman and Paramatma; the Supersoul in
every entity is His plenary portion. He is the fountainhead of everything, and
everyone is advised to surrender unto His lotus feet. Despite all these clear
statements, the mciyayc'tpahrta-jﬁc‘mc‘th deride the personality of the Supreme
Lord and consider Him merely another human being. They do not know that
the blessed form of human life is designed after the eternal and transcendental
feature of the Supreme Lord.

All the unauthorized interpretations of the Gitc't by the class of
mciyayc‘tpahrta—jﬁcim‘th, outside the purview of the paramparci system, are so
many stumbling blocks on the path of spiritual understanding. The deluded
interpreters do not surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, nor do they
teach others to follow this principle.

(4) The last class of duskrti is called asuram bhc‘wam cis’ritc‘th, or those of
demonic principles. This class is openly atheistic. Some of them argue that the
Supreme Lord can never descend upon this material world, but they are unable
to give any tangible reasons as to why not. There are others who make Him
subordinate to the impersonal feature, although the opposite is declared in the
Gita. Envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the atheist will present
a number of illicit incarnations manufactured in the factory of his brain. Such
persons, whose very principle of life is to decry the Personality of Godhead,



cannot surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna.

Sri Yamunacarya Albandaru of South India said, “O my Lord! You are
unknowable to persons involved with atheistic principles, despite Your
uncommon qualities, features and activities, despite Your personality’s being
confirmed by all the revealed scriptures in the quality of goodness, and despite
Your being acknowledged by the famous authorities renowned for their depth
of knowledge in the transcendental science and situated in the godly
qualities.”

Therefore, (1) grossly foolish persons, (2) the lowest of mankind, (3) the
deluded speculators, and (4) the professed atheists, as above mentioned, never
surrender unto the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead in spite of all
scriptural and authoritative advice.

TEXT 16

ﬁﬁwmwaﬁrzwﬁﬁiﬁﬁl
alaiﬁlsrrataiaiaﬁamﬁtumu

catur—vidhc‘t bhajcmte mam
jahc‘th sukrtiho ’rjuha
cirto jijﬁc‘tsm arthc‘trthi
jﬁc‘mi ca bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

catuh—Uidhc‘th—four kinds of; bhajcmte—render services; mam—unto Me;
jahc‘Ih—persons; su—krtihah—those who are pious; arjuha—O Arjuna;
c'mah—the distressed; jijﬁc'tsuh—the inquisitive; artha-arthi—one who desires
material gain; jﬁc‘mi—one who knows things as they are; ca—also;
bhamta-Tsabha—O great one amongst the descendants of Bharata.

TRANSLATION
0 best among the Bharatas, four kinds of pious men begin to render



devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the
inquisitive, and he Who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.

PURPORT

Unlike the miscreants, these are adherents of the regulative principles of
the scriptures, and they are called sukrtihah, or those who obey the rules and
regulations of scriptures, the moral and social laws, and are, more or less,
devoted to the Supreme Lord. Out of these there are four classes of
men—those who are sometimes distressed, those who are in need of money,
those who are sometimes inquisitive, and those who are sometimes searching
after knowledge of the Absolute Truth. These persons come to the Supreme
Lord for devotional service under different conditions. These are not pure
devotees, because they have some aspiration to fulfill in exchange for
devotional service. Pure devotional service is without aspiration and without
desire for material profit. The Bbakti—rasﬁmrta-smdbu (1.1.11) defines pure
devotion thus:

anyabhilc‘tsitc‘t-s’ﬁhyam
jﬁaha—karmady—ahavrtam
c‘mukﬁlyeha krshc‘mu—
s’ilaham bhaktir uttamc‘t
[Madhya 19.167]

“One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through fruitive
activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure devotional service.”

When these four kinds of persons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional
service and are completely purified by the association of a pure devotee, they
also become pure devotees. As far as the miscreants are concerned, for them
devotional service is very difficult because their lives are selfish, irregular and
without spiritual goals. But even some of them, by chance, when they come in
contact with a pure devotee, also become pure devotees.

Those who are always busy with fruitive activities come to the Lord in



material distress and at that time associate with pure devotees and become, in
their distress, devotees of the Lord. Those who are simply frustrated also come
sometimes to associate with the pure devotees and become inquisitive to know
about God. Similarly, when the dry philosophers are frustrated in every field of
knowledge, they sometimes want to learn of God, and they come to the
Supreme Lord to render devotional service and thus transcend knowledge of
the impersonal Brahman and the localized Paramatma and come to the
personal conception of Godhead by the grace of the Supreme Lord or His pure
devotee. On the whole, when the distressed, the inquisitive, the seekers of
knowledge, and those who are in need of money are free from all material
desires, and when they fully understand that material remuneration has
nothing to do with spiritual improvement, they become pure devotees. As long
as such a purified stage is not attained, devotees in transcendental service to
the Lord are tainted with fruitive activities, the search for mundane
knowledge, etc. So one has to transcend all this before one can come to the
stage of pure devotional service.

TEXT 17

WWWWWI
fﬁlﬁiﬁﬁtﬁﬁisaeinﬁaamfﬁwmu

tesc‘tm jﬁc‘mi hitya—yukta
eka—bhaktir vis’isyate
priyo hi jﬁc‘miho ’tyartham
aham sa ca mama priyah

SYNONYMS

tesdm—out of them; jﬁc‘mi—one in full knowledge; hitya—yuktah—always
engaged; eka—only; bhaktih—in devotional service; Uis’isyate—is special;
priyah—very dear; hi—certainly; jﬁc‘mihah—to the person in knowledge;
atyartham—highly; aham—I am; sah—he; ca—also; mama—to Me;



priyah—dear.

TRANSLATION

Of these, the one Who is in full knowledge and Who is always engaged in
pure devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him, and he is clear to

Me.

PURPORT

Free from all contaminations of material desires, the distressed, the
inquisitive, the penniless and the seeker after supreme knowledge can all
become pure devotees. But out of them, he who is in knowledge of the
Absolute Truth and free from all material desires becomes a really pure
devotee of the Lord. And of the four orders, the devotee who is in full
knowledge and is at the same time engaged in devotional service is, the Lord
says, the best. By searching after knowledge one realizes that his self is
different from his material body, and when further advanced he comes to the
knowledge of impersonal Brahman and Paramatma. When one is fully purified,
he realizes that his constitutional position is to be the eternal servant of God.
So by association with pure devotees the inquisitive, the distressed, the seeker
after material amelioration and the man in knowledge all become themselves
pure. But in the preparatory stage, the man who is in full knowledge of the
Supreme Lord and is at the same time executing devotional service is very dear
to the Lord. He who is situated in pure knowledge of the transcendence of the
Supreme Personality of God is so protected in devotional service that material
contamination cannot touch him.

TEXT 18

m:naiqaﬁamaﬁaﬁml
Wzaﬁwwmﬁaﬁeniwﬁttuwu

udc‘m‘th sarva evaite



jﬁc‘mi tv citmaiva me matam
asthitah sa hi yuktc‘ttmc‘t
mam evc‘muttamc‘tm gatim

SYNONYMS

udarc‘th—magnanimous; sarve—all; eva—certainly; ete—these; jﬁc‘mi—one
who is in knowledge; tu—but; citmc't eva—just like Myself; me—My;
matam—opinion; cisthitah—situated; sah—he; hi—certainly;
yukta-c‘ttmc‘t—engaged in devotional service; mam—in Me; eva—certainly;
ahuttamc‘tm—the highest; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

All these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he Who is
situated in knowledge of Me I consider to be just like My own self. Being
engaged in My transcendental service, he is sure to attain Me, the highest and
most perfect goal.

PURPORT

It is not that devotees who are less complete in knowledge are not dear to
the Lord. The Lord says that all are magnanimous because anyone who comes
to the Lord for any purpose is called a mahc‘ttmc‘t, or great soul. The devotees
who want some benefit out of devotional service are accepted by the Lord
because there is an exchange of affection. Out of affection they ask the Lord
for some material benefit, and when they get it they become so satisfied that
they also advance in devotional service. But the devotee in full knowledge is
considered to be very dear to the Lord because his only purpose is to serve the
Supreme Lord with love and devotion. Such a devotee cannot live a second
without contacting or serving the Supreme Lord. Similarly, the Supreme Lord
is very fond of His devotee and cannot be separated from him.

In the grimad-Bbégavatam (9.4.68), the Lord says:
sadhavo hrdayam mahyam



sadhﬁhc‘tm hrdayam tv aham
mad-cmyat te ha jc‘mcmti
haham tebhyo mahag api

“The devotees are always in My heart, and I am always in the hearts of the
devotees. The devotee does not know anything beyond Me, and I also cannot
forget the devotee. There is a very intimate relationship between Me and the
pure devotees. Pure devotees in full knowledge are never out of spiritual touch,
and therefore they are very much dear to Me.”

TEXT 19
WWWWI
argéazaaiﬁrﬁranequmsu

bahﬁnc‘tm jahmcmcim ante

jﬁc‘mavc‘m mam prapadyate
vc‘tsudevah sarvam iti

sa mahc‘ttmc‘t su—durlabhah

SYNONYMS

bahﬁm‘tm—many; jahmahcim—repeated births and deaths; ante—after;
jﬁc‘ma-vc‘m—one who is in full knowledge; mam—unto Me;
prapadyate—surrenders; vasudevah—the Personality of Godhead, Krsna;
sarvam—everything; iti—thus; sah—that; mahc‘I—dtmc‘t—great soul;
su—durlabhah—very rare to see.

TRANSLATION

After many births and deaths, he Who is actually in knowledge surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Such a great
soul is very rare.



PURPORT

The living entity, while executing devotional service or transcendental
rituals after many, many births, may actually become situated in
transcendental pure knowledge that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the ultimate goal of spiritual realization. In the beginning of spiritual
realization, while one is trying to give up one’s attachment to materialism,
there is some leaning towards impersonalism, but when one is further
advanced he can understand that there are activities in the spiritual life and
that these activities constitute devotional service. Realizing this, he becomes
attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and surrenders to Him. At
such a time one can understand that Lord Sri Krsna’s mercy is everything, that
He is the cause of all causes and that this material manifestation is not
independent from Him. He realizes the material world to be a perverted
reflection of spiritual variegatedness and realizes that in everything there is a
relationship with the Supreme Lord Krsna. Thus he thinks of everything in
relation to Vasudeva, or Sri Krsna. Such a universal vision of Vasudeva
precipitates one’s full surrender to the Supreme Lord Sri Krsna as the highest
goal. Such surrendered great souls are very rare.

This verse is very nicely explained in the Third Chapter (verses 14 and 15)
of the Svetasvatara Upcmisad:

sahasra—s’irsc‘t purusah
sahasrc‘tksah sahasra—pc‘tt
sa bhﬁmim vis’vato vrtvc‘t—

tyc‘ttisthad das’c‘mgulam

purusa evedam sarvam
yad bhﬁtam yac ca bhavyam
utc‘tmrtawasyes’c‘mo
yad ahhehc‘ttirohati

In the Cbéndogya Upam'saa (5.1.15) it is said, ha vai vc‘tco ha caksﬁmsi ha
s’rotrc‘mi ha mahamsity cicaksate prc‘ma iti evdcaksate prc‘mo hy evaitc‘mi sarvc‘mi



bhavcmti: “In the body of a living being neither the power to speak, nor the
power to see, nor the power to hear, nor the power to think is the prime factor;
it is life which is the center of all activities.” Similarly Lord Vasudeva, or the
Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna, is the prime entity in everything. In
this body there are powers of speaking, of seeing, of hearing, of mental
activities, etc. But these are not important if not related to the Supreme Lord.
And because Vasudeva is all-pervading and everything is Vasudeva, the
devotee surrenders in full knowledge (cf. Bhagavad-gitc‘t 7.17 and 11.40).

TEXT 20

mﬁﬁéaemmﬁsaﬁaam
€€WWW:WII3MI

kamais tais tair hrta-jﬁc‘mc‘th
prapadyahte ’hya-devatc‘th
tam tam hiyamam cisthc‘tya
prakrtyci hiyatc‘th svayc‘t

SYNONYMS

kamaih—by desires; taih taih—various; hTta—deprived of;
jhc‘mc‘th—knowledge; prapadyahte—surrender; anya—to other;
devatc‘th—demigods; tam tam—corresponding; hiyamam—regulations;
dsthciya—following; prakrtyc‘t—by nature; hiyatc‘th—controlled; svayc‘I—by their
own.

TRANSLATION

Those Whose intelligence has been stolen by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship according to
their own natures.

PURPORT



Those who are freed from all material contaminations surrender unto the
Supreme Lord and engage in His devotional service. As long as the material
contamination is not completely washed off, they are by nature nondevotees.
But even those who have material desires and who resort to the Supreme Lord
are not so much attracted by external nature; because of approaching the right
goal, they soon become free from all material lust. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it
is recommended that whether one is a pure devotee and is free from all
material desires, or is full of material desires, or desires liberation from material
contamination, he should in all cases surrender to Vasudeva and worship Him.

As stated in the Bhagavatam (2.3.10):

akc‘tmah sarva—kc‘tmo vc‘t

moksa—kc‘tma udara-dhih
tiweha bhakti-yogeha
yajeta purusam param

Less intelligent people who have lost their spiritual sense take shelter of
demigods for immediate fulfillment of material desires. Generally, such people
do not go to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because they are in the
lower modes of nature (ignorance and passion) and therefore worship various
demigods. Following the rules and regulations of worship, they are satisfied.
The worshipers of demigods are motivated by small desires and do not know
how to reach the supreme goal, but a devotee of the Supreme Lord is not
misguided. Because in Vedic literature there are recommendations for
worshiping different gods for different purposes (e.g., a diseased man is
recommended to worship the sun), those who are not devotees of the Lord
think that for certain purposes demigods are better than the Supreme Lord.
But a pure devotee knows that the Supreme Lord Krsna is the master of all. In
the Caitanya—caritc‘tmrta (A611 5.142) it is said, ekale is’vara krsha, am saba
bhrtya: only the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is master, and all
others are servants. Therefore a pure devotee never goes to demigods for
satisfaction of his material needs. He depends on the Supreme Lord. And the
pure devotee is satisfied with whatever He gives.



TEXT 21

ainiaiafaﬁnezawWI
WWWWWHQ?"

yo yo yam yam tcmum bhaktah
s’raddhayc‘wcitum icchati
tasya tasyc‘tcalc‘tm s’raddhc‘tm
tam eva vidadhc‘tmy aham

SYNONYMS

yah yah—whoever; yam yc‘tm—whichever; tahum—form of a demigod;
bhaktah—devotee; s’raddhayd—with faith; arcitum—to worship;
icchati—desires; tasya tasya—to him; acalc‘tm—steady; s’raddhc‘tm—faith;
tc‘tm—that; eva—surely; vidadhc‘tmi—give; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

I am in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to worship
some demigod, I make his faith steady so that he can devote himself to that
particular deity.

PURPORT

God has given independence to everyone; therefore, if a person desires to
have material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have such facilities from
the material demigods, the Supreme Lord, as Supersoul in everyone’s heart,
understands and gives facilities to such persons. As the supreme father of all
living entities, He does not interfere with their independence, but gives all
facilities so that they can fulfill their material desires. Some may ask why the
all-powerful God gives facilities to the living entities for enjoying this material
world and so lets them fall into the trap of the illusory energy. The answer is
that if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give such facilities, then there



is no meaning to independence. Therefore He gives everyone full
independence—whatever one likes—but His ultimate instruction we find in
the Bhagavad-gitc‘t: one should give up all other engagements and fully
surrender unto Him. That will make man happy.

Both the living entity and the demigods are subordinate to the will of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the living entity cannot worship
the demigod by his own desire, nor can the demigod bestow any benediction
without the supreme will. As it is said, not a blade of grass moves without the
will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Generally, persons who are
distressed in the material world go to the demigods, as they are advised in the
Vedic literature. A person wanting some particular thing may worship such
and such a demigod. For example, a diseased person is recommended to
worship the sun-god; a person wanting education may worship the goddess of
learning, Sarasvati; and a person wanting a beautiful wife may worship the
goddess Uma, the wife of Lord Siva. In this way there are recommendations in
the s’c'IstI'as (Vedic scriptures) for different modes of worship of different
demigods. And because a particular living entity wants to enjoy a particular
material facility, the Lord inspires him with a strong desire to achieve that
benediction from that particular demigod, and so he successfully receives the
benediction. The particular mode of the devotional attitude of the living
entity toward a particular type of demigod is also arranged by the Supreme
Lord. The demigods cannot infuse the living entities with such an affinity, but
because He is the Supreme Lord, or the Supersoul who is present in the hearts
of all living entities, Krsna gives impetus to man to worship certain demigods.
The demigods are actually different parts of the universal body of the Supreme
Lord; therefore they have no independence. In the Vedic literature it is stated:
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead as Supersoul is also present within the
heart of the demigod; therefore He arranges through the demigod to fulfill the
desire of the living entity. But both the demigod and the living entity are
dependent on the supreme will. They are not independent.”

TEXT 22



sa tayc‘t s’raddhayc‘t yuktas
tasyc‘trc‘tdhaham ihate

labhate ca tatah kamah
mayaiva vihitc‘m hi tc‘m

SYNONYMS

sah—he; tayc‘t—with that; s’raddhayc‘t—inspiration; yuktah—endowed;
tasya—of that demigod; circ‘tdhanam—for the worship; ihate—he aspires;
labhate—obtains; ca—and; tatah—from that; kamah—his desires; maya—by
Me; eva—alone; Uihitc'm—arranged; hi—certainly; tc'm—those.

TRANSLATION

Endowed With such a faith, he endeavors to worship a particular demigod
and obtains his desires. But in actuality these benefits are bestowed by Me
alone.

PURPORT

The demigods cannot award benedictions to their devotees without the
permission of the Supreme Lord. The living entity may forget that everything
is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the demigods do not forget. So the
worship of demigods and achievement of desired results are due not to the
demigods but to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by arrangement. The
less intelligent living entity does not know this, and therefore he foolishly goes
to the demigods for some benefit. But the pure devotee, when in need of
something, prays only to the Supreme Lord. Asking for material benefit,
however, is not a sign of a pure devotee. A living entity goes to the demigods
usually because he is mad to fulfill his lust. This happens when something
undue is desired by the living entity and the Lord Himself does not fulfill the



desire. In the Caitanya-caritc‘tmrta it is said that one who worships the Supreme
Lord and at the same time desires material enjoyment is contradictory in his
desires. Devotional service to the Supreme Lord and the worship of a demigod
cannot be on the same platform, because worship of a demigod is material and
devotional service to the Supreme Lord is completely spiritual.

For the living entity who desires to return to Godhead, material desires are
impediments. A pure devotee of the Lord is therefore not awarded the material
benefits desired by less intelligent living entities, who therefore prefer to
worship demigods of the material world rather than engage in the devotional
service of the Supreme Lord.

TEXT 23

WWWWI
Warhammwhumu

cmtcwat tu phalam tesc‘tm
tad bhavaty alpa—medhasc‘tm
devc‘m deva—yajo yc‘mti
mad—bhaktc‘t yc‘mti mam api

SYNONYMS

anta—vat—perishable; tu—but; phalam—fruit; tesc‘tm—their; tat—that;
bhavati—becomes; alpa—medhasc‘tm—of those of small intelligence; devc‘m—to
the demigods; deva-yajah—the worshipers of the demigods; yc‘mti—go;
mat—My; bhaktc‘Ih—devotees; yc‘mti—go; mam—to Me; api—also.

TRANSLATION

Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited
and temporary. Those Who worship the demigods go to the planets of the
demigods, but My devotees ultimately reach My supreme planet.



PURPORT

Some commentators on the Bhagavad-gitc‘t say that one who worships a
demigod can reach the Supreme Lord, but here it is clearly stated that the
worshipers of demigods go to the different planetary systems where various
demigods are situated, just as a worshiper of the sun achieves the sun or a
worshiper of the demigod of the moon achieves the moon. Similarly, if anyone
wants to worship a demigod like Indra, he can attain that particular god’s
planet. It is not that everyone, regardless of whatever demigod is worshiped,
will reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is denied here, for it is
clearly stated that the worshipers of demigods go to different planets in the
material world but the devotee of the Supreme Lord goes directly to the
supreme planet of the Personality of Godhead.

Here the point may be raised that if the demigods are different parts of the
body of the Supreme Lord, then the same end should be achieved by
worshiping them. However, worshipers of the demigods are less intelligent
because they don’t know to what part of the body food must be supplied. Some
of them are so foolish that they claim that there are many parts and many ways
to supply food. This isn’t very sanguine. Can anyone supply food to the body
through the ears or eyes? They do not know that these demigods are different
parts of the universal body of the Supreme Lord, and in their ignorance they
believe that each and every demigod is a separate God and a competitor of the
Supreme Lord.

Not only are demigods parts of the Supreme Lord, but ordinary living
entities are also. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that the brc‘thmahas are
the head of the Supreme Lord, the ksatriyas are His arms, the vais’yas are His
waist, the s’ﬁdms are His legs, and all serve different functions. Regardless of
the situation, if one knows that both the demigods and himself are part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, his knowledge is perfect. But if he does not
understand this, he achieves different planets where the demigods reside. This
is not the same destination the devotee reaches.

The results achieved by the demigods’ benedictions are perishable because
within this material world the planets, the demigods and their worshipers are



all perishable. Therefore it is clearly stated in this verse that all results
achieved by worshiping demigods are perishable, and therefore such worship is
performed by the less intelligent living entity. Because the pure devotee
engaged in Krsna consciousness in devotional service of the Supreme Lord
achieves eternal blissful existence that is full of knowledge, his achievements
and those of the common worshiper of the demigods are different. The
Supreme Lord is unlimited; His favor is unlimited; His mercy is unlimited.
Therefore the mercy of the Supreme Lord upon His pure devotees is unlimited.

TEXT 24
WWWWWH
I3R“iiiﬁltlTsiFlr—rﬁ1:|'1:|1591'éil'ElElK-I'EI'EL||Q8"

avyaktam vyaktim apahham
manycmte mam abuddhayah
param bhc‘wam ajc‘mahto
mamc‘wyayam anuttamam

SYNONYMS

avyaktam—nonmanifested; vyaktim—personality; apahham—achieved;
manyahte—think; mam—Me; abuddhayah—less intelligent persons;
param—supreme; bhavam—existence; ajc‘mahtah—without knowing;
mama—My; avyayam—imperishable; ahuttamam—the finest.

TRANSLATION

Unintelligent men, Who do not know Me perfectly, think that I, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, was impersonal before and have now
assumed this personality. Due to their small knowledge, they do not know My
higher nature, Which is imperishable and supreme.

PURPORT



Those who are worshipers of demigods have been described as less
intelligent persons, and here the impersonalists are similarly described. Lord
Krsna in His personal form is here speaking before Arjuna, and still, due to
ignorance, impersonalists argue that the Supreme Lord ultimately has no form.
Yamunacarya, a great devotee of the Lord in the disciplic succession of
Ramanujacarya, has written two very appropriate verses in this connection.
He says,

tvc‘m’t s’ila—rﬁpa—caritaih parama—prakrstaih
sattveha scittvikatayd prabalais’ ca s’c‘tstraih
prakhyc‘tta—daiva—paramc‘wtha—vidam matais’ ca
haivc‘tsma—pmkrtayah prabhavcmti boddhum

“My dear Lord, devotees like Vyasadeva and Narada know You to be the
Personality of Godhead. By understanding different Vedic literatures, one can
come to know Your characteristics, Your form and Your activities, and one can
thus understand that You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But those
who are in the modes of passion and ignorance, the demons, the nondevotees,
cannot understand You. They are unable to understand You. However expert
such nondevotees may be in discussing Vedc'mta and the Upam'sads and other
Vedic literatures, it is not possible for them to understand the Personality of
Godhead.” (Stotra-rama 12)

In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that the Personality of Godhead cannot
be understood simply by study of the Vedc'mta literature. Only by the mercy of
the Supreme Lord can the Personality of the Supreme be known. Therefore in
this verse it is clearly stated that not only are the worshipers of the demigods
less intelligent, but those nondevotees who are engaged in Vedc'mta and
speculation on Vedic literature without any tinge of true Krsna consciousness
are also less intelligent, and for them it is not possible to understand God’s
personal nature. Persons who are under the impression that the Absolute
Truth is impersonal are described as abuddhayah, which means those who do
not know the ultimate feature of the Absolute Truth. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that supreme realization begins from the
impersonal Brahman and then rises to the localized Supersoul—but the



ultimate word in the Absolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead. Modern
impersonalists are still less intelligent, for they do not even follow their great
predecessor Sankaracarya, who has specifically stated that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Impersonalists, therefore, not knowing the
Supreme Truth, think Krsna to be only the son of Devaki and Vasudeva, or a
prince, or a powerful living entity. This is also condemned in the
Bbagavad—gité (9.11). Avajc‘mcmti mam mﬁdhc‘t manusim tcmum cis’ritam: “Only
the fools regard Me as an ordinary person.”

The fact is that no one can understand Krsna without rendering devotional
service and without developing Krsna consciousness. The Bbzigavatam

(10.14.29) confirms this:

athcipi te deva padambuja—dvaya-
prasc‘tda—les’c‘mugrhita eva hi
jc‘mc‘tti tattvam bhagavah-mahimho
ha cc‘mya eko ’pi ciram vicihvah

“My Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of the mercy of Your lotus
feet, he can understand the greatness of Your personality. But those who
speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are unable to
know You, even though they continue to study the Vedas for many years.” One
cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, or His form,
quality or name simply by mental speculation or by discussing Vedic literature.
One must understand Him by devotional service. When one is fully engaged in
Krsna consciousness, beginning by chanting the mahc‘t-mahtm—Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare—then only can one understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Nondevotee impersonalists think that Krsna has a body made of this
material nature and that all His activities, His form and everything are mciyc't.
These impersonalists are known as Mayavadis. They do not know the ultimate
truth.

The twentieth verse clearly states, kamais tais tair hrta-jﬁc‘mc‘th prapadyahte
’hya-devatc'th. “Those who are blinded by lusty desires surrender unto the
different demigods.” It is accepted that besides the Supreme Personality of



Godhead, there are demigods who have their different planets, and the Lord
also has a planet. As stated in the twenty-third verse, devc‘m deva—yajo yc‘mti
mad-bhaktc‘t yc‘mti mam api: the worshipers of the demigods go to the different
planets of the demigods, and those who are devotees of Lord Krsna go to the
Krsnaloka planet. Although this is clearly stated, the foolish impersonalists
still maintain that the Lord is formless and that these forms are impositions.
From the study of the Gitc't does it appear that the demigods and their abodes
are impersonal? Clearly, neither the demigods nor Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, are impersonal. They are all persons; Lord Krsna is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He has His own planet, and the
demigods have theirs.

Therefore the monistic contention that ultimate truth is formless and that
form is imposed does not hold true. It is clearly stated here that it is not
imposed. From the Bhagavad-gitc‘t we can clearly understand that the forms of
the demigods and the form of the Supreme Lord are simultaneously existing
and that Lord Krsna is sac—cid—c‘mahda, eternal blissful knowledge. The Vedas
also confirm that the Supreme Absolute Truth is ahahda-mayo ’bhyc'tsc'tt, or by
nature full of blissful pleasure, and that He is the reservoir of unlimited
auspicious qualities. And in the Gitc't the Lord says that although He is aja
(unborn), He still appears. These are the facts that we should understand from
the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. We cannot understand how the Supreme Personality of
Godhead can be impersonal; the imposition theory of the impersonalist monist
is false as far as the statements of the Gitc't are concerned. It is clear herein that
the Supreme Absolute Truth, Lord Krsna, has both form and personality.

TEXT 25

ﬁmmaieimzl
agisﬁmfﬁemﬁreﬁﬁmwwu 39 ||

naham prakc‘ts’ah sarvasya
yoga-mciya—samcivrtah
mﬁdho ’yam habhijc‘mciti



loko mam ajam avyayam

SYNONYMS

ha—nor; aham—I; prakc‘ts’ah—manifest; sarvasya—to everyone;
yoga—mc‘tyc‘t—by internal potency; samavrtah—covered; mﬁdhah—foolish;
ayam—these; ha—not; abhijc‘mc‘tti—can understand; lokah—persons;
mcim—Me; ajam—unborn; avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am covered

by My internal potency, and therefore they do not know that I am unborn and
infallible.

PURPORT

It may be argued that since Krsna was present on this earth and was visible
to everyone, then why isn’t He manifest to everyone now? But actually He was
not manifest to everyone. When Krsna was present there were only a few
people who could understand Him to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
In the assembly of Kurus, when Sis’upala spoke against Krsna’s being elected
president of the assembly, Bhisma supported Him and proclaimed Him to be
the Supreme God. Similarly, the Pandavas and a few others knew that He was
the Supreme, but not everyone. He was not revealed to the nondevotees and
the common man. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t Krsna says that but for His
pure devotees, all men consider Him to be like themselves. He was manifest
only to His devotees as the reservoir of all pleasure. But to others, to
unintelligent nondevotees, He was covered by His internal potency.

In the prayers of Kunti in the grimad-Bbégavatam (1.8.19) it is said that the
Lord is covered by the curtain of yoga-mciyc‘t and thus ordinary people cannot
understand Him. This yoga-mciyc‘t curtain is also confirmed in the isbpam'sad
(mantra 15), in which the devotee prays:

hirahmayeha pcitreha



satyasyc‘tpihitam mukham
tat tvam pﬁscmn apc‘wmu
satya—dharmc‘tya drstaye

“O my Lord, You are the maintainer of the entire universe, and devotional
service to You is the highest religious principle. Therefore, I pray that You will
also maintain me. Your transcendental form is covered by the yoga-mciyc‘t. The
brahmajyoti is the covering of the internal potency. May You kindly remove
this glowing effulgence that impedes my seeing Your sac—cid—c‘mahda-vigmha
[Bs. 5.1], Your eternal form of bliss and knowledge.” The Supreme Personality
of Godhead in His transcendental form of bliss and knowledge is covered by
the internal potency of the brahmajyoti, and the less intelligent impersonalists
cannot see the Supreme on this account.

Also in the grimad-Bbégavatam (10.14.7) there is this prayer by Brahma: “0
Supreme Personality of Godhead, O Supersoul, 0 master of all mystery, who
can calculate Your potency and pastimes in this world? You are always
expanding Your internal potency, and therefore no one can understand You.
Learned scientists and learned scholars can examine the atomic constitution
of the material world or even the planets, but still they are unable to calculate
Your energy and potency, although You are present before them.” The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, is not only unborn but also
avyaya, inexhaustible. His eternal form is bliss and knowledge, and His
energies are all inexhaustible.

TEXT 26

aal'a‘aneﬁarﬁaeirrHTﬁEI—ghI
Wawﬁmgaaqmﬁuqau

vedaham samatitc‘mi

vartamc‘mc‘mi cc‘trjuha

bhavisyc‘mi ca thZtc‘mi
mam tu veda ha kas’ccma



SYNONYMS

veda—know; aham—I; samatitc‘mi—completely past; vartamc‘mc‘mi—present;
ca—and; arjuha—O Arjuna; bhavisyc‘mi—future; ca—also; bhﬁtc‘mi—all living
entities; mam—Me; tu—but; veda—knows; ha—not; kas’ccma—anyone.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that
has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and all things that
are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me no one knows.

PURPORT

Here the question of personality and impersonality is clearly stated. If
Krsna, the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, were mciyc't, material,
as the impersonalists consider Him to be, then like the living entity He would
change His body and forget everything about His past life. Anyone with a
material body cannot remember his past life, nor can he foretell his future life,
nor can he predict the outcome of his present life; therefore he cannot know
what is happening in past, present and future. Unless one is liberated from
material contamination, he cannot know past, present and future.

Unlike the ordinary human being, Lord Krsna clearly says that He
completely knows what happened in the past, what is happening in the
present, and what will happen in the future. In the Fourth Chapter we have
seen that Lord Krsna remembers instructing Vivasvan, the sun-god, millions of
years ago. Krsna knows every living entity because He is situated in every
living beings heart as the Supersoul. But despite His presence in every living
entity as Supersoul and His presence as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the less intelligent, even if able to realize the impersonal Brahman, cannot
realize Sri Krsna as the Supreme Person. Certainly the transcendental body of
Sri Krsna is not perishable. He is just like the sun, and mciyc't is like a cloud. In
the material world we can see that there is the sun and that there are clouds



and different stars and planets. The clouds may cover all these in the sky
temporarily, but this covering is only apparent to our limited vision. The sun,
moon and stars are not actually covered. Similarly, mciyc't cannot cover the
Supreme Lord. By His internal potency He is not manifest to the less
intelligent class of men. As it is stated in the third verse of this chapter, out of
millions and millions of men, some try to become perfect in this human form
of life, and out of thousands and thousands of such perfected men, hardly one
can understand what Lord Krsna is. Even if one is perfected by realization of
impersonal Brahman or localized Paramatma, he cannot possibly understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, without being in Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 27

WWWI
H&Hﬁaﬁeaﬁmﬁrwuwu

icchc‘I—dvesa—samuttheha
dvahdUa—moheha bhc‘wata
sarva—bhﬁtc‘mi sammoham
sarge yc‘mti parantapa

SYNONYMS

icchc‘I—desire; dvesa—and hate; samuttheha—arisen from; dvcmdva—of
duality; moheha—by the illusion; bhc‘wata—O scion of Bharata; sarva—all;
thZtc‘mi—living entities; sammoham—into delusion; sarge—while taking birth;
yc‘mti—go; parahtapa—O conqueror of enemies.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, O conqueror of the foe, all living entities are born into
delusion, bewildered by dualities arisen from desire and hate.



PURPORT

The real constitutional position of the living entity is that of subordination
to the Supreme Lord, who is pure knowledge. When one is deluded into
separation from this pure knowledge, he becomes controlled by illusory energy
and cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The illusory
energy is manifested in the duality of desire and hate. Due to desire and hate,
the ignorant person wants to become one with the Supreme Lord and envies
Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Pure devotees, who are not
deluded or contaminated by desire and hate, can understand that Lord Sri
Krsna appears by His internal potencies, but those who are deluded by duality
and nescience think that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is created by
material energies. This is their misfortune. Such deluded persons,
symptomatically, dwell in dualities of dishonor and honor, misery and
happiness, woman and man, good and bad, pleasure and pain, etc., thinking,
“This is my wife; this is my house; I am the master of this house; I am the
husband of this wife.” These are the dualities of delusion. Those who are so
deluded by dualities are completely foolish and therefore cannot understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 28
WWWWWI
ﬁmﬁﬁmmmaﬁaﬁzuwu

yesc‘tm tv anta-gatam papam
jahahc‘tm punya—karmahc‘tm
te dvahdva—moha-hirmuktc‘t
bhajcmte mam drdha-watc‘th

SYNONYMS

yesc‘tm—whose; tu—but; anta—gatam—completely eradicated; papam—sin;



jahc‘mc‘tm—of the persons; punya—pious; karmahc‘tm—whose previous
activities; te—they; dvcmdva—of duality; moha—delusion; hirmuktc‘th—free
from; bhajcmte—engage in devotional service; mam—to Me;
drdha—watc‘th—with determination.

TRANSLATION

Persons Who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life and Whose
sinful actions are completely eradicated are freed from the dualities of delusion,
and they engage themselves in My service With determination.

PURPORT

Those eligible for elevation to the transcendental position are mentioned in
this verse. For those who are sinful, atheistic, foolish and deceitful, it is very
difficult to transcend the duality of desire and hate. Only those who have
passed their lives in practicing the regulative principles of religion, who have
acted piously and who have conquered sinful reactions can accept devotional
service and gradually rise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Then, gradually, they can meditate in trance on the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is the process of being situated on the spiritual
platform. This elevation is possible in Krsna consciousness in the association of
pure devotees, for in the association of great devotees one can be delivered
from delusion.

It is stated in the grimad-Bbégavatam (5.5.2) that if one actually wants to be
liberated he must render service to the devotees (mahat—sevc‘tm dvc‘wam c‘Ihm
Uimukteh); but one who associates with materialistic people is on the path
leading to the darkest region of existence (tamo—dvc‘tram yositc‘tm sahgi—sahgam).
All the devotees of the Lord traverse this earth just to recover the conditioned
souls from their delusion. The impersonalists do not know that forgetting their
constitutional position as subordinate to the Supreme Lord is the greatest
violation of God’s law. Unless one is reinstated in his own constitutional
position, it is not possible to understand the Supreme Personality or to be fully
engaged in His transcendental loving service with determination.



TEXT 29

WWWWWWQI
éwaﬁgzmﬁiﬁmuaeu

jarc‘t—maraha—moksc‘tya
mam cis’ritya yatcmti ye
te brahma tad viduh krtsham
adhyc‘ttmam karma cc‘tkhilam

SYNONYMS

jarc‘t—from old age; maraha—and death; moksc‘tya—for the purpose of
liberation; mam—Me; cis’ritya—taking shelter of; yatcmti—endeavor; ye—all
those who; te—such persons; brahma—Brahman; tat—actually that;
viduh—they know; krtsham—everything; adhyc‘ttmam—transcendental;
karma—activities; ca—also; akhilam—entirely.

TRANSLATION

Intelligent persons Who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and death
take refuge in Me in devotional service. They are actually Brahman because
they entirely know everything about transcendental activities.

PURPORT

Birth, death, old age and diseases affect this material body, but not the
spiritual body. There is no birth, death, old age and disease for the spiritual
body, so one who attains a spiritual body, becomes one of the associates of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and engages in eternal devotional service is
really liberated. Aham brahmc‘tsmi: I am spirit. It is said that one should
understand that he is Brahman, spirit soul. This Brahman conception of life is
also in devotional service, as described in this verse. The pure devotees are



transcendentally situated on the Brahman platform, and they know everything
about transcendental activities.

Four kinds of impure devotees who engage themselves in the
transcendental service of the Lord achieve their respective goals, and by the
grace of the Supreme Lord, when they are fully Krsna conscious, they actually
enjoy spiritual association with the Supreme Lord. But those who are
worshipers of demigods never reach the Supreme Lord in His supreme planet.
Even the less intelligent Brahman-realized persons cannot reach the supreme
planet of Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana. Only persons who perform
activities in Krsna consciousness (mam cis’ritya) are actually entitled to be
called Brahman, because they are actually endeavoring to reach the Krsna
planet. Such persons have no misgivings about Krsna, and thus they are
factually Brahman.

Those who are engaged in worshiping the form or area of the Lord, or who
are engaged in meditation on the Lord simply for liberation from material
bondage, also know, by the grace of the Lord, the purports of Brahman,
adhibhﬁta, etc., as explained by the Lord in the next chapter.

TEXT 30
Whaﬁaﬁaﬁﬁgn
Wsﬁaniﬁﬁgﬁﬁaaz || 3o ||

sadhibhﬁtc‘tdhidaivam mam
scidhiyajﬁam ca ye viduh
prayc‘ma—kc‘tle ’pi ca mam
te vidm yukta—cetasah

SYNONYMS

sa-adhibhﬁta—and the governing principle of the material manifestation;
adhidaivam—governing all the demigods; mam—Me; sa-adhiyajﬁam—and
governing all sacrifices; ca—also; ye—those who; Uiduh—know; prayc'ma—of



death; kale—at the time; api—even; ca—and; mam—Me; te—they;
viduh—know; yukta—cetasah—their minds engaged in Me.

TRANSLATION

Those in full consciousness of Me, Who know Me, the Supreme Lord, to be
the governing principle of the material manifestation, of the demigods, and of all
methods of sacrifice, can understand and know Me, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, even at the time of death.

PURPORT

Persons acting in Krsna consciousness are never deviated from the path of
entirely understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the
transcendental association of Krsna consciousness, one can understand how
the Supreme Lord is the governing principle of the material manifestation and
even of the demigods. Gradually, by such transcendental association, one
becomes convinced of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and at the time of
death such a Krsna conscious person can never forget Krsna. Naturally he is
thus promoted to the planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Vrndavana.

This Seventh Chapter particularly explains how one can become a fully
Krsna conscious person. The beginning of Krsna consciousness is association
of persons who are Krsna conscious. Such association is spiritual and puts one
directly in touch with the Supreme Lord, and, by His grace, one can
understand Krsna to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the same
time one can really understand the constitutional position of the living entity
and how the living entity forgets Krsna and becomes entangled in material
activities. By gradual development of Krsna consciousness in good association,
the living entity can understand that due to forgetfulness of Krsna he has
become conditioned by the laws of material nature. He can also understand
that this human form of life is an opportunity to regain Krsna consciousness
and that it should be fully utilized to attain the causeless mercy of the Supreme
Lord.

Many subjects have been discussed in this chapter: the man in distress, the



inquisitive man, the man in want of material necessities, knowledge of
Brahman, knowledge of Paramatma, liberation from birth, death and diseases,
and worship of the Supreme Lord. However, he who is actually elevated in
Krsna consciousness does not care for the different processes. He simply
directly engages himself in activities of Krsna consciousness and thereby
factually attains his constitutional position as an eternal servitor of Lord
Krsna. In such a situation he takes pleasure in hearing and glorifying the
Supreme Lord in pure devotional service. He is convinced that by his doing so,
all his objectives will be fulfilled. This determined faith is called drdha-wata,
and it is the beginning of bhakti-yoga, or transcendental loving service. That is
the verdict of all scriptures. This Seventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t is the
substance of that conviction.

Thus end the Bhaktivedahta Purports to the Seventh Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Knowledge of the Absolute.

Attaining the Supreme

 

TEXT 1

W331?
ﬁmmﬁkﬁwﬁiﬁm
Waﬁﬁiﬁfﬁamﬁuw

arjuha uvc‘tca
kim tad brahma kim adhyc‘ttmam



kim karma purusottama
adhibhﬁtam ca kim proktam
adhidaivam kim ucyate

SYNONYMS

arjuhah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; kim—what; tat—that; brahma—Brahman;
kim—what; adhyc‘ttmam—the self; kim—what; karma—fruitive activities;
purusa—uttama—O Supreme Person; adhibhﬁtam—the material manifestation;
ca—and; kim—what; proktam—is called; adhidaivam—the demigods;
kim—what; ucyate—is called.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, 0 Supreme Person, What is Brahman? What is
the self? What are fruitive activities? What is this material manifestation? And
What are the demigods? Please explain this to me.

PURPORT

In this chapter Lord Krsna answers different questions from Arjuna,
beginning with “What is Brahman?” The Lord also explains karma (fruitive
activities), devotional service and yoga principles, and devotional service in its
pure form. The Srimad-Bhagavatam explains that the Supreme Absolute Truth
is known as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. In addition, the living entity,
the individual soul, is also called Brahman. Arjuna also inquires about citmc't,
which refers to body, soul and mind. According to the Vedic dictionary, citmc't
refers to the mind, soul, body and senses also.

Arjuna has addressed the Supreme Lord as Purusottama, Supreme Person,
which means that he was putting these questions not simply to a friend but to
the Supreme Person, knowing Him to be the supreme authority able to give
definitive answers.

TEXT 2



311313131: $31 $531 335 I
Waeﬁﬁﬁsﬁrﬁmﬁrﬁr: || 3 ||

adhiyajﬁah katham k0 ’tra
dehe ’smih madhusﬁdaha
praydha—kc‘tle ca katham
jﬁeyo ’si hiyatc‘ttmabhih

SYNONYMS

adhiyajﬁah—the Lord of sacrifice; katham—how; kah—who; atra—here;
dehe—in the body; asmih—this; madhusﬁdaha—O Madhusﬂdana;
praydha—kc‘tle—at the time of death; ca—and; katham—how; jﬁeyah asi—You
can be known; hiyata-c'ttmabhih—by the self-controlled.

TRANSLATION
Who is the Lord of sacrifice, and how does He live in the body, 0

Madhusﬁdana? And how can those engaged in devotional service know You at
the time of death?

PURPORT

“Lord of sacrifice” may refer to either Indra or Visnu. Visnu is the chief of
the primal demigods, including Brahma and Siva, and Indra is the chief of the
administrative demigods. Both Indra and Visnu are worshiped by yajﬁa
performances. But here Arjuna asks who is actually the Lord of yajﬁa
(sacrifice) and how the Lord is residing within the body of the living entity.

Arjuna addresses the Lord as Madhusﬂdana because Krsna once killed a
demon named Madhu. Actually these questions, which are of the nature of
doubts, should not have arisen in the mind of Arjuna, because Arjuna is a
Krsna conscious devotee. Therefore these doubts are like demons. Since Krsna
is so expert in killing demons, Arjuna here addresses Him as Madhusﬂdana so



that Krsna might kill the demonic doubts that arise in Arjuna’s mind.

Now the word prayc'ma-kc'tle in this verse is very significant because
whatever we do in life will be tested at the time of death. Arjuna is very
anxious to know of those who are constantly engaged in Krsna consciousness.
What should be their position at that final moment? At the time of death all
the bodily functions are disrupted, and the mind is not in a proper condition.
Thus disturbed by the bodily situation, one may not be able to remember the
Supreme Lord. Maharaja Kulas’ekhara, a great devotee, prays, “My dear Lord,
just now I am quite healthy, and it is better that I die immediately so that the
swan of my mind can seek entrance at the stem of Your lotus feet.” The
metaphor is used because the swan, a bird of the water, takes pleasure in
digging into the lotus ﬂowers; its sporting proclivity is to enter the lotus flower.
Maharaja Kulas’ekhara says to the Lord, “Now my mind is undisturbed, and I
am quite healthy. If I die immediately, thinking of Your lotus feet, then I am
sure that my performance of Your devotional service will become perfect. But
if I have to wait for my natural death, then I do not know what will happen,
because at that time the bodily functions will be disrupted, my throat will be
choked up, and I do not know whether I shall be able to chant Your name.
Better let me die immediately.” Arjuna questions how a person can fix his
mind on Krsna’s lotus feet at such a time.

TEXT 3

. 5]]"IJIEIIEEEIIEI
31313 3131 11311 3311113115me I
W 1313131: 3133113131: || 3 ||

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
aksamm brahma paramam
svabhc‘wo ’dhyc‘ttmam ucyate

thZta—bhc‘wodbhava—karo

visargah karma—samjﬁitah



SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
aksaram—indestructible; brahma—Brahman; paramam—transcendental;
svabhc‘wah—eternal nature; adhyc‘ttmam—the self; ucyate—is called;
thZta-bhc‘wa—udbhava—karah—producing the material bodies of the living
entities; visargah—creation; karma—fruitive activities; samjﬁitah—is called.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The indestructible,
transcendental living entity is called Brahman, and his eternal nature is called
adhyatma, the self. Action pertaining to the development of the material bodies
of the living entities is called karma, or fruitive activities.

PURPORT

Brahman is indestructible and eternally existing, and its constitution is not
changed at any time. But beyond Brahman there is Parabrahman. Brahman
refers to the living entity, and Parabrahman refers to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The constitutional position of the living entity is different from
the position he takes in the material world. In material consciousness his
nature is to try to be the lord of matter, but in spiritual consciousness, Krsna
consciousness, his position is to serve the Supreme. When the living entity is
in material consciousness, he has to take on various bodies in the material
world. That is called karma, or varied creation by the force of material
consciousness.

In Vedic literature the living entity is called jivc'ttmc't and Brahman, but he is
never called Parabrahman. The living entity (jivc'ttmc't) takes different
positions—sometimes he merges into the dark material nature and identifies
himself with matter, and sometimes he identifies himself with the superior,
spiritual nature. Therefore he is called the Supreme Lord’s marginal energy.
According to his identification with material or spiritual nature, he receives a



material or spiritual body. In material nature he may take a body from any of
the 8,400,000 species of life, but in spiritual nature he has only one body. In
material nature he is manifested sometimes as a man, demigod, animal, beast,
bird, etc., according to his karma. To attain material heavenly planets and
enjoy their facilities, he sometimes performs sacrifices (yajﬁa), but when his
merit is exhausted he returns to earth again in the form of a man. This process
is called karma.

The Chc‘mdogya Upcmisad describes the Vedic sacrificial process. On the
sacrificial altar, five kinds of offerings are made into five kinds of fire. The five
kinds of fire are conceived of as the heavenly planets, clouds, the earth, man
and woman, and the five kinds of sacrificial offerings are faith, the enjoyer on
the moon, rain, grains and semen.

In the process of sacrifice, the living entity makes specific sacrifices to
attain specific heavenly planets and consequently reaches them. When the
merit of sacrifice is exhausted, the living entity descends to earth in the form
of rain, then takes on the form of grains, and the grains are eaten by man and
transformed into semen, which impregnates a woman, and thus the living
entity once again attains the human form to perform sacrifice and so repeat
the same cycle. In this way, the living entity perpetually comes and goes on the
material path. The Krsna conscious person, however, avoids such sacrifices. He
takes directly to Krsna consciousness and thereby prepares himself to return to
Godhead.

Impersonalist commentators on the Bhagavad-gitc‘t unreasonably assume
that Brahman takes the form of jiva in the material world, and to substantiate
this they refer to Chapter Fifteen, verse 7, of the Gita. But in this verse the
Lord also speaks of the living entity as “an eternal fragment of Myself.” The
fragment of God, the living entity, may fall down into the material world, but
the Supreme Lord (Acyuta) never falls down. Therefore this assumption that
the Supreme Brahman assumes the form of jiva is not acceptable. It is
important to remember that in Vedic literature Brahman (the living entity) is
distinguished from Parabrahman (the Supreme Lord).

TEXT 4



31131113131311113rug36131®€31313u
3113133183331333331131131311811

adhibhﬁtam ksaro bhc‘wah
purusas’ cc‘tdhidaivatam
adhiyajﬁo ’ham evc‘ttra
dehe deha—bhrtc‘tm 11am

SYNONYMS

adhibhﬁtam—the physical manifestation; ksarah—constantly changing;
bhc‘wah—nature; pumsah—the universal form, including all the demigods, like
the sun and moon; ca—and; adhidaivatam—called adhidaiva; adhiyajﬁah—the
Supersoul; aham—I (Krsna); eva—certainly; atra—in this; dehe—body;
deha—bhrtc‘tm—of the embodied; vara—O best.

TRANSLATION

0 best of the embodied beings, the physical nature, Which is constantly
changing, is called adhibhﬁta [the material manifestation]. The universal form
of the Lord, Which includes all the demigods, like those of the sun and moon, is
called adhidaiva. And I, the Supreme Lord, represented as the Supersoul in the
heart of every embodied being, am called adhiyajﬁa [the Lord of sacrifice].

PURPORT

The physical nature is constantly changing. Material bodies generally pass
through six stages: they are born, they grow, they remain for some duration,
they produce some by-products, they dwindle, and then they vanish. This
physical nature is called adhibhﬁta. It is created at a certain point and will be
annihilated at a certain point. The conception of the universal form of the
Supreme Lord, which includes all the demigods and their different planets, is
called adhidaivata. And present in the body along with the individual soul is



the Supersoul, a plenary representation of Lord Krsna. The Supersoul is called
the Paramatma or adhiyajﬁa and is situated in the heart. The word eva is
particularly important in the context of this verse because by this word the
Lord stresses that the Paramatma is not different from Him. The Supersoul,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, seated beside the individual soul, is the
witness of the individual soul’s activities and is the source of the soul’s various
types of consciousness. The Supersoul gives the individual soul an opportunity
to act freely and witnesses his activities. The functions of all these different
manifestations of the Supreme Lord automatically become clarified for the
pure Krsna conscious devotee engaged in transcendental service to the Lord.
The gigantic universal form of the Lord called adhidaivata is contemplated by
the neophyte who cannot approach the Supreme Lord in His manifestation as
Supersoul. The neophyte is advised to contemplate the universal form, or
virat-pumsa, whose legs are considered the lower planets, whose eyes are
considered the sun and moon, and whose head is considered the upper
planetary system.

TEXT 5

WHWWWI
31:9318131113'1313113131133331313131:11911

anta—kc‘tle ca mam eva
smarcm muktvd kalevaram
yah prayc‘tti sa mad—bhc‘wam
yc‘tti misty atra sams’ayah

SYNONYMS

anta—kc‘tle—at the end of life; ca—also; mcim—Me; eva—certainly;
smarah—remembering; muktvc‘I—quitting; kalevaram—the body; yah—he
who; prayc‘tti—goes; sah—he; mat—bhc‘wam—My nature; yc‘tti—achieves;
ha—not; asti—there is; atra—here; sams’ayah—doubt.



TRANSLATION

And Whoever, at the end of his life, quits his body, remembering Me alone,
at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.

PURPORT

In this verse the importance of Krsna consciousness is stressed. Anyone
who quits his body in Krsna consciousness is at once transferred to the
transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord. The Supreme Lord is the purest of
the pure. Therefore anyone who is constantly Krsna conscious is also the
purest of the pure. The word smarcm (“remembering”) is important.
Remembrance of Krsna is not possible for the impure soul who has not
practiced Krsna consciousness in devotional service. Therefore one should
practice Krsna consciousness from the very beginning of life. If one wants to
achieve success at the end of his life, the process of remembering Krsna is
essential. Therefore one should constantly, incessantly chant the
mahc‘t-mahtm—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Lord Caitanya has advised that one be as
tolerant as a tree (tai‘Oi‘ iva sahishuhc't). There may be so many impediments for
a person who is chanting Hare Krsna. Nonetheless, tolerating all these
impediments, one should continue to chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, so that at
the end of one’s life one can have the full benefit of Krsna consciousness.

yam yam Udpi smarcm bhavam
tyajaty cmte kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kauhteya



sadc‘t tad-bhdUa—bhc‘witah

SYNONYMS

yam yam—whatever; 1151 api—at all; smarah—remembering; bhavam—nature;
tyajati—gives up; cmte—at the end; kalevaram—this body; tam tam—similar;
eva—certainly; eti—gets; kauhteya—O son of Kunti; sadc‘t—always; tat—that;
bhc‘wa—state of being; bhc‘witah—remembering.

TRANSLATION

Whatever state of being one remembers When he quits his body, 0 son of
Kunti, that state he Will attain Without fail.

PURPORT

The process of changing one’s nature at the critical moment of death is
here explained. A person who at the end of his life quits his body thinking of
Krsna attains the transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord, but it is not true
that a person who thinks of something other than Krsna attains the same
transcendental state. This is a point we should note very carefully. How can
one die in the proper state of mind? Maharaja Bharata, although a great
personality, thought of a deer at the end of his life, and so in his next life he
was transferred into the body of a deer. Although as a deer he remembered his
past activities, he had to accept that animal body. Of course, one’s thoughts
during the course of one’s life accumulate to inﬂuence one’s thoughts at the
moment of death, so this life creates one’s next life. If in one’s present life one
lives in the mode of goodness and always thinks of Krsna, it is possible for one
to remember Krsna at the end of one’s life. That will help one be transferred to
the transcendental nature of Krsna. If one is transcendentally absorbed in
Krsna’s service, then his next body will be transcendental (spiritual), not
material. Therefore the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare is the best process
for successfully changing one’s state of being at the end of one’s life.



TEXT 7

WWWWHI
WWW

1||t9||

tasmc‘tt sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-maho-buddhir
mam evaisyasy asams’ayah

SYNONYMS

tasmc‘It—therefore; sarvesu—at all; kalesu—times; mam—Me; anusmara—go
on remembering; yudhya—fight; ca—also; mayi—unto Me;
arpita—surrendering; mahah—mind; buddhih—intellect; mam—unto Me;
eva—surely; esyasi—you will attain; asams’ayah—beyond a doubt.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krsna and
at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With your activities
dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me, you Will attain Me
Without doubt.

PURPORT

This instruction to Arjuna is very important for all men engaged in
material activities. The Lord does not say that one should give up his
prescribed duties or engagements. One can continue them and at the same
time think of Krsna by chanting Hare Krsna. This will free one from material
contamination and engage the mind and intelligence in Krsna. By chanting
Krsna’s names, one will be transferred to the supreme planet, Krsnaloka,
without a doubt.



TEXT 8

WWWI
WWWWWWIIW

abhyc‘tsa-yoga—yukteha

cetasc‘t hahya—gc‘tmmc‘t
paramam purusam divyam

yc‘tti parthc‘mucihtayah

SYNONYMS

abhyc‘tsa-yoga—by practice; yukteha—being engaged in meditation; cetasc‘t—by
the mind and intelligence; ha anya-gc‘tmim‘t—without their being deviated;
paramam—the Supreme; purusam—Personality of Godhead;
divyam—transcendental; yc‘tti—one achieves; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha;
ahucihtayah—constantly thinking of.

TRANSLATION

He Who meditates on Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind
constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, 0
Partha, is sure to reach Me.

PURPORT

In this verse Lord Krsna stresses the importance of remembering Him.
One’s memory of Krsna is revived by chanting the mahc‘t-mahtm, Hare Krsna.
By this practice of chanting and hearing the sound vibration of the Supreme
Lord, one’s ear, tongue and mind are engaged. This mystic meditation is very
easy to practice, and it helps one attain the Supreme Lord. Pumsam means
enjoyer. Although living entities belong to the marginal energy of the
Supreme Lord, they are in material contamination. They think themselves



enjoyers, but they are not the supreme enjoyer. Here it is clearly stated that
the supreme enjoyer is the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different
manifestations and plenary expansions as Narayana, Vasudeva, etc.

The devotee can constantly think of the object of worship, the Supreme
Lord, in any of His features—Narayana, Krsna, Rama, etc.—by chanting Hare
Krsna. This practice will purify him, and at the end of his life, due to his
constant chanting, he will be transferred to the kingdom of God. Yoga practice
is meditation on the Supersoul within; similarly, by chanting Hare Krsna one
fixes his mind always on the Supreme Lord. The mind is fickle, and therefore
it is necessary to engage the mind by force to think of Krsna. One example
often given is that of the caterpillar that thinks of becoming a butterﬂy and so
is transformed into a butterﬂy in the same life. Similarly, if we constantly
think of Krsna, it is certain that at the end of our lives we shall have the same
bodily constitution as Krsna.

TEXT 9
3811131011113111313113—
1101130113113111331331
WWW—

szmu 311

kavim purc‘mam anus’c‘tsitc‘tram
ahor ahiyc‘tmsam anusmared yah
sarvasya dhc‘ttc‘tram acihtya—mpam
aditya-vamam tamasah parastc‘tt

SYNONYMS

kavim—the one who knows everything; purc‘mam—the oldest;
anus’c‘tsitc‘tram—the controller; ahoh—than the atom; ahiyc‘tmsam—smaller;
anusmaret—always thinks of; yah—one who; sarvasya—of everything;
dhc‘ttc‘wam—the maintainer; acihtya—inconceivable; rﬁpam—whose form;



aditya—vamam—luminous like the sun; tamasah—to darkness;
parastc‘It—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one Who knows
everything, as He Who is the oldest, Who is the controller, Who is smaller than
the smallest, Who is the maintainer of everything, Who is beyond all material
conception, Who is inconceivable, and Who is always a person. He is luminous
like the sun, and He is transcendental, beyond this material nature.

PURPORT

The process of thinking of the Supreme is mentioned in this verse. The
foremost point is that He is not impersonal or void. One cannot meditate on
something impersonal or void. That is very difficult. The process of thinking of
Krsna, however, is very easy and is factually stated herein. First of all, the Lord
is pumsa, a person—we think of the person Rama and the person Krsna. And
whether one thinks of Rama or of Krsna, what He is like is described in this
verse of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The Lord is kavi; that is, He knows past, present and
future and therefore knows everything. He is the oldest personality because He
is the origin of everything; everything is born out of Him. He is also the
supreme controller of the universe, and He is the maintainer and instructor of
humanity. He is smaller than the smallest. The living entity is one
ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair, but the Lord is so inconceivably small
that He enters into the heart of this particle. Therefore He is called smaller
than the smallest. As the Supreme, He can enter into the atom and into the
heart of the smallest and control him as the Supersoul. Although so small, He
is still all-pervading and is maintaining everything. By Him all these planetary
systems are sustained. We often wonder how these big planets are floating in
the air. It is stated here that the Supreme Lord, by His inconceivable energy, is
sustaining all these big planets and systems of galaxies. The word acihtya
(“inconceivable”) is very significant in this connection. God’s energy is
beyond our conception, beyond our thinking jurisdiction, and is therefore



called inconceivable (acihtya). Who can argue this point? He pervades this
material world and yet is beyond it. We cannot comprehend even this material
world, which is insignificant compared to the spiritual world—so how can we
comprehend what is beyond? Acihtya means that which is beyond this material
world, that which our argument, logic and philosophical speculation cannot
touch, that which is inconceivable. Therefore intelligent persons, avoiding
useless argument and speculation, should accept what is stated in scriptures
like the Vedas, Bhagavad-gitc‘t and Srimad-Bhagavatam and follow the
principles they set down. This will lead one to understanding.

TEXT 10

WW
WWWQW
WWW—

méwWﬁﬁaﬁu 9o ||

praydha—kc‘tle mahasc‘tcaleha
bhaktyc‘t yukto yoga—baleha caiva
bhmvor madhye prc‘mam c‘wes’ya samyak
sa tam param purusam upaiti divyam

SYNONYMS

praydha—kc‘tle—at the time of death; mahasc‘t—by the mind; acaleha—without
its being deviated; bhaktyc't—in full devotion; yuktah—engaged;
yoga—baleha—by the power of mystic yoga; ca—also; eva—certainly;
bhruvoh—the two eyebrows; madhye—between; prc‘mam—the life air;
aves’ya—establishing; samyak—completely; sah—he; tam—that;
param—transcendental; pumsam—Personality of Godhead; upaiti—achieves;
divyam—in the spiritual kingdom.

TRANSLATION



One Who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows and,
by the strength of yoga, With an undeviating mind, engages himself in
remembering the Supreme Lord in full devotion, Will certainly attain to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly stated that at the time of death the mind must be
fixed in devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those practiced
in yoga, it is recommended that they raise the life force between the eyebrows
(to the ajﬁc‘t—cakra). The practice of sat—cakra—yoga, involving meditation on
the six cakms, is suggested here. A pure devotee does not practice such yoga,
but because he is always engaged in Krsna consciousness, at death he can
remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead by His grace. This is explained
in verse fourteen.

The particular use of the word yoga-baleha is significant in this verse
because without practice of yoga—whether sat—cakra—yoga or bhakti—yoga—one
cannot come to this transcendental state of being at the time of death. One
cannot suddenly remember the Supreme Lord at death; one must have
practiced some yoga system, especially the system of bhakti-yoga. Since one’s
mind at death is very disturbed, one should practice transcendence through
yoga during one’s life.

TEXT 11
33333313313381
13131331 213131311 3131313131

WWW]?
33133333313393" 99 ||

yad aksaram veda—Uido vadcmti
vis’cmti yad yatayo vita—rc‘tgc‘th



yad icchcmto brahmacaryam carcmti
tat te padam sahgraheha pravaksye

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; aksaram—syllable om; veda—vidah—persons conversant with
the Vedas; vadcmti—say; vis’ahti—enter; yat—in which; yatayah—great sages;
Uita-Tagc'th—in the renounced order of life; yat—that which;
icchahtah—desiring; brahmacaryam—celibacy; carahti—practice; tat—that;
te—unto you; padam—situation; sahgraheha—in summary; pravaksye—I shall
explain.

TRANSLATION

Persons Who are learned in the Vedas, Who utter omkara and Who are great
sages in the renounced order enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection, one
practices celibacy. I shall now briefly explain to you this process by Which one
may attain salvation.

PURPORT

Lord Sri Krsna has recommended to Arjuna the practice of sat-cakTa-yoga,
in which one places the air of life between the eyebrows. Taking it for granted
that Arjuna might not know how to practice sat-cakm-yoga, the Lord explains
the process in the following verses. The Lord says that Brahman, although one
without a second, has various manifestations and features. Especially for the
impersonalists, the aksai‘a, or omkaTa—the syllable om—is identical with
Brahman. Krsna here explains the impersonal Brahman, in which the
renounced order of sages enter.

In the Vedic system of knowledge, students, from the very beginning, are
taught to vibrate 0111 and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahman by living
with the spiritual master in complete celibacy. In this way they realize two of
Brahman’s features. This practice is very essential for the student’s
advancement in spiritual life, but at the moment such brahmacc‘tri (unmarried



celibate) life is not at all possible. The social construction of the world has
changed so much that there is no possibility of one’s practicing celibacy from
the beginning of student life. Throughout the world there are many
institutions for different departments of knowledge, but there is no recognized
institution where students can be educated in the brahmacc‘wi principles.
Unless one practices celibacy, advancement in spiritual life is very difficult.
Therefore Lord Caitanya has announced, according to the scriptural
injunctions for this Age of Kali, that in this age no process of realizing the
Supreme is possible except the chanting of the holy names of Lord Krsna: Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare.

TEXT 12

mmweeawm
l19211313113131:913111113231131131121130113"9311

sarva—dvc‘trc‘mi samyamya
memo hrdi m'mdhya ca
mﬁrdhhy adhc‘ch‘Itmahah prc‘mam
cisthito yoga—dhcirahc‘tm

SYNONYMS

sarva-dvc‘m‘mi—all the doors of the body; samyamya—controlling; mahah—the
mind; thi—in the heart; hitudhya—confining; ca—also; mﬁrdhhi—on the
head; adhciya—fixing; citmahah—of the soul; prc‘mam—the life air;
cisthitah—situated in; yoga—dhc‘trahc‘tm—the yogic situation.

TRANSLATION

The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements.
Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heart and the life
air at the top of the head, one establishes himself in yoga.



PURPORT

To practice yoga as suggested here, one first has to close the doors of all
sense enjoyment. This practice is called pratyc'thc'n'a, or withdrawing the senses
from the sense objects. The sense organs for acquiring knowledge—the eyes,
ears, nose, tongue and touch—should be fully controlled and should not be
allowed to engage in self-gratification. In this way the mind focuses on the
Supersoul in the heart, and the life force is raised to the top of the head. In the
Sixth Chapter this process is described in detail. But as mentioned before, this
practice is not practical in this age. The best process is Krsna consciousness. If
one is always able to fix his mind on Krsna in devotional service, it is very easy
for him to remain in an undisturbed transcendental trance, or in samadhi.

TEXT 13

emmeI
31:93111313331ﬁ3‘313118111311131mu93u

om ity ekc‘tksaram brahma
vyc‘tharcm mam anusmarah
yah prayc‘tti tyajcm deham
sa yc‘tti paramam gatim

SYNONYMS

om—the combination of letters om (omkc‘wa); iti—thus; eka—aksaram—the one
syllable; brahma—absolute; vyc‘tharah—vibrating; mam—Me (Krsna);
anusmarah—remembering; yah—anyone who; prayc‘tti—leaves;
tyajcm—quitting; deham—this body; sah—he; yc‘tti—achieves; paramam—the
supreme; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION



After being situated in this yoga practice and Vibrating the sacred syllable
om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he Will certainly reach the spiritual
planets.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated here that 0111, Brahman and Lord Krsna are not different.
The impersonal sound of Krsna is 0111, but the sound Hare Krsna contains 0111.
The chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra is clearly recommended for this age.
80 if one quits his body at the end of life chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, he
certainly reaches one of the spiritual planets, according to the mode of his
practice. The devotees of Krsna enter the Krsna planet, Goloka Vrndavana.
For the personalists there are also innumerable other planets, known as
Vaikuntha planets, in the spiritual sky, whereas the impersonalists remain in
the brahmajyoti.

TEXT 14

3.13131313133131313'11111’3113811313‘1391
333133135112111211313331358121113131:II9811

cmahya—cetc‘th satatam
yo mam smarati hityas’ah
tasyc‘tham sulabhah pc‘wtha

m'tya—yuktasya yogihah

SYNONYMS

ahahya-cetc‘th—without deviation of the mind; satatam—always; yah—anyone
who; mam—Me (Krsna); smarati—remembers; hityas’ah—regularly; tasya—to
him; aham—I am; su—labhah—very easy to achieve; pc‘mha—O son of Prtha;



hitya—regularly; yuktasya—engaged; yogihah—for the devotee.

TRANSLATION

For one Who always remembers Me Without deviation, I am easy to obtain, 0
son of Prtha, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.

PURPORT

This verse especially describes the final destination attained by the
unalloyed devotees who serve the Supreme Personality of Godhead in
bhakti-yoga. Previous verses have mentioned four different kinds of
devotees—the distressed, the inquisitive, those who seek material gain, and
the speculative philosophers. Different processes of liberation have also been
described: karma—yoga, jﬁc‘ma—yoga and hatha—yoga. The principles of these yoga
systems have some bhakti added, but this verse particularly mentions pure
bhakti—yoga, without any mixture of jﬁc‘ma, karma or hatha. As indicated by the
word ananya—cetc‘th, in pure bhakti-yoga the devotee desires nothing but Krsna.
A pure devotee does not desire promotion to heavenly planets, nor does he
seek oneness with the brahmajyoti or salvation or liberation from material
entanglement. A pure devotee does not desire anything. In the
Caitanya—caritc‘tmrta the pure devotee is called hiskc‘tma, which means he has
no desire for self-interest. Perfect peace belongs to him alone, not to them who
strive for personal gain. Whereas a jhc‘ma—yogi, karma-yogi or hatha—yogi has his
own selfish interests, a perfect devotee has no desire other than to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord says that for anyone who
is unflinchingly devoted to Him, He is easy to attain.

A pure devotee always engages in devotional service to Krsna in one of His
various personal features. Krsna has various plenary expansions and
incarnations, such as Rama and Nrsimha, and a devotee can choose to fix his
mind in loving service to any of these transcendental forms of the Supreme
Lord. Such a devotee meets with none of the problems that plague the
practitioners of other yogas. Bhakti-yoga is very simple and pure and easy to
perform. One can begin simply by chanting Hare Krsna. The Lord is merciful



to all, but as we have already explained, He is especially inclined toward those
who always serve Him without deviation. The Lord helps such devotees in
various ways. As stated in the Vedas (Karlie Upam'saa 1.2.23), yam evaisa vmute
teha labhyas/ tasyaisa citmd vivrhute tcmum swim: one who is fully surrendered
and engaged nithe devoﬁonalservke ofthe Suprmne Lonican underﬁand
the Supreme Lord as He is. And as stated in Bbagavad—gité (10.10), dadc'tmi
buddhi-yogam tam: the Lord gives such a devotee sufficient intelligence so that
ultimately the devotee can attain Him in His spiritual kingdom.

The special qualification of the pure devotee is that he is always thinking of
Krsna without deviation and without considering the time or place. There
should be no impediments. He should be able to carry out his service anywhere
and at any time. Some say that the devotee should remain in holy places like
Vrndavana or some holy town where the Lord lived, but a pure devotee can
hw:wwwhaeandCRMeth:mnwmhaeoanmﬁwmabyhm(kwﬂmnﬂ
service. It was Sri Advaita who told Lord Caitanya, “Wherever You are, 0
Lord——thereis\/n1davana3’

As indicated by the words satatam and hityas’ah, which mean “always,”
“regularly,” or “every day,” a pure devotee constantly remembers Krsna and
meditates upon Him. These are qualifications of the pure devotee for whom
the Lord is most easily attainable. Bhakti-yoga is the system that the Gitc't
reconunends above aﬂ.others.(}eneraﬂy,the bhaktﬂyogm are engaged hiiive
different ways: (1) s’c‘mta-bhakta, engaged in devotional service in neutrality;
(2) dasya-bhakuL engaged in devothnlalservice asservant;(3)sakhya-bhakta,
engaged as ﬂjend; (4) Udtyﬂya-bhakuL engaged as parent; and. (5)
inadhurya-bhakuL engaged ascxnﬂugallover ofthe Suprenu:Ixmd.In.any of
these ways, the pure devotee is always constantly engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord and cannot forget the
Supreme Lord, and so for him the Lord is easily attained. A pure devotee
cannotﬂngettheSuprmneIxndforainonunu,andshnﬂaﬂytheSuprmneIxnd
cannot forget His pure devotee for a moment. This is the great blessing of the
Krsna conscious process of chanting the mahc‘t-mahtm—Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare

Hare.



TEXT 15

WWQWMI
31331833313313:3113113;11311131311:II9911

mam upetya punar jcmma

duhkhc‘tlayam as’c‘ts’vatam

haphuvahti mahc‘ttmc‘mah
samsiddhim paramam gatc‘th

SYNONYMS

mcim—Me; upetya—achieving; puhah—again; jahma—birth;
duhkha—c‘tlayam—place of miseries; as’c‘ts’vatam—temporary; ha—never;
ciphuvahti—attain; mahc‘I—c‘ttmc‘mah—the great souls; samsiddhim—perfection;
paramam—ultimate; gatc‘th—having achieved.

TRANSLATION

After attaining Me, the great souls, Who are yogis in devotion, never return
to this temporary world, Which is full of miseries, because they have attained
the highest perfection.

PURPORT

Since this temporary material world is full of the miseries of birth, old age,
disease and death, naturally he who achieves the highest perfection and
attains the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana, does not wish to
return. The supreme planet is described in Vedic literature as avyakta and
aksam and paramc't gati; in other words, that planet is beyond our material
vision, and it is inexplicable, but it is the highest goal, the destination for the
mahc‘ttmc‘ts (great souls). The mahc‘ttmc‘ts receive transcendental messages from
the realized devotees and thus gradually develop devotional service in Krsna



consciousness and become so absorbed in transcendental service that they no
longer desire elevation to any of the material planets, nor do they even want to
be transferred to any spiritual planet. They only want Krsna and Krsna’s
association, and nothing else. That is the highest perfection of life. This verse
specifically mentions the personalist devotees of the Supreme Lord, Krsna.
These devotees in Krsna consciousness achieve the highest perfection of life.
In other words, they are the supreme souls.

TEXT 16

Wulaaaﬁhﬁssﬁn
mﬁﬁagﬁﬁugﬁmﬁﬁaﬁu 9311

c‘I—brahma—bhuvam‘tl lokc‘th
puhar c‘wartiho ’rjuha
mam upetya tu kaunteya
puhar jcmma ha vidyate

SYNONYMS

a—brahma—bhuvam‘tt—up to the Brahmaloka planet; lokc‘th—the planetary
systems; puhah—again; dvartihah—returning; arjuha—O Arjuna; mam—unto
Me; upetya—arriving; tu—but; kauhteya—O son of Kunti; puhah
jahma—rebirth; ha—never; Vidyate—takes place.

TRANSLATION

From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are
places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one Who
attains to My abode, 0 son of Kunti, never takes birth again.

PURPORT

All kinds of yogis—karma, jﬁc‘ma, hatha, etc.—eventually have to attain



devotional perfection in bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, before they can
go to Krsna’s transcendental abode and never return. Those who attain the
highest material planets, the planets of the demigods, are again subjected to
repeated birth and death. As persons on earth are elevated to higher planets,
people on higher planets such as Brahmaloka, Candraloka and Indraloka fall
down to earth. The practice of sacrifice called paﬁcc‘tgni-vidyc‘t, recommended in
the Chc‘mdogya Upcmisad, enables one to achieve Brahmaloka, but if, on
Brahmaloka, one does not cultivate Krsna consciousness, then he must return
to earth. Those who progress in Krsna consciousness on the higher planets are
gradually elevated to higher and higher planets and at the time of universal
devastation are transferred to the eternal spiritual kingdom. Sridhara Svami,
in his commentary on Bhagavad-gitc‘t, quotes this verse:

brahmahc‘t saha te sarve
samprc‘tpte pratisaﬁcare
parasyc‘mte krtc‘ttmc‘mah
pravis’cmti param padam

“When there is devastation of this material universe, Brahma and his
devotees, who are constantly engaged in Krsna consciousness, are all
transferred to the spiritual universe and to specific spiritual planets according
to their desires.”

TEXT 17

Wﬁgn
31131$13133313113183131318131313I1HI9311

sahasra—yuga—paryantam

ahar yad brahmaho viduh

rc‘ttrim yuga—sahasrc‘mtdm
te ’ho—rc‘ttra-vido jahc‘th

SYNONYMS



sahasra—one thousand; yuga—millenniums; paryahtam—including;
ahah—day; yat—that which; brahmahah—of Brahma; viduh—they know;
rc‘ttrim—night; yuga—millenniums; sahasra—ahtc‘tm—similarly, ending after
one thousand; te—they; ahah-rc‘ttm—day and night; vidah—who understand;
jahc‘th—people.

TRANSLATION

By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together form the duration of
Brahmﬁ’s one day. And such also is the duration of his night.

PURPORT

The duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in cycles of
kalpas. A kalpa is a day of Brahma, and one day of Brahma consists of a
thousand cycles of four yugas, or ages: Satya, Treta, Dvapara and Kali. The
cycle of Satya is characterized by virtue, wisdom and religion, there being
practically no ignorance and vice, and the yuga lasts 1,728,000 years. In the
Treta-yuga vice is introduced, and this yuga lasts 1,296,000 years. In the
Dvapara-yuga there is an even greater decline in virtue and religion, vice
increasing, and this yuga lasts 864,000 years. And finally in Kali-yuga (the
yuga we have now been experiencing over the past 5,000 years) there is an
abundance of strife, ignorance, irreligion and vice, true virtue being practically
nonexistent, and this yuga lasts 432,000 years. In Kali-yuga vice increases to
such a point that at the termination of the yuga the Supreme Lord Himself
appears as the Kalki avatc'n'a, vanquishes the demons, saves His devotees, and
commences another Satya-yuga. Then the process is set rolling again. These
four yugas, rotating a thousand times, comprise one day of Brahma, and the
same number comprise one night. Brahma lives one hundred of such “years”
and then dies. These “hundred years” by earth calculations total to 311 trillion
and 40 billion earth years. By these calculations the life of Brahma seems
fantastic and interminable, but from the viewpoint of eternity it is as brief as a
lightning ﬂash. In the Causal Ocean there are innumerable Brahmas rising
and disappearing like bubbles in the Atlantic. Brahma and his creation are all



part of the material universe, and therefore they are in constant flux.

In the material universe not even Brahma is free from the process of birth,
old age, disease and death. Brahma, however, is directly engaged in the service
of the Supreme Lord in the management of this universe—therefore he at
once attains liberation. Elevated scmnyc'tsis are promoted to Brahma’s particular
planet, Brahmaloka, which is the highest planet in the material universe and
which survives all the heavenly planets in the upper strata of the planetary
system, but in due course Brahma and all the inhabitants of Brahmaloka are
subject to death, according to the law of material nature.

TEXT 18

31333191331333:31311:w13132133131311
WWWIIFII

avyaktc‘td vyaktayah sarvc‘th
prabhavcmty ahar—c‘tgame
rc‘ttry—c‘tgame praliyahte
tatraivc‘wyakta—samjﬁake

SYNONYMS

avyaktc‘tt—from the unmanifest; vyaktayah—living entities; sarvc‘th—all;
prabhavahti—become manifest; ahah—c‘tgame—at the beginning of the day;
rc‘ttri—c‘tgame—at the fall of night; praliyahte—are annihilated; tatra—into that;
eva—certainly; avyakta—the unmanifest; samjﬁake—which is called.

TRANSLATION

At the beginning of Brahmﬁ’s day, all living entities become manifest from
the unmanifest state, and thereafter, When the night falls, they are merged into
the unmanifest again.

TEXT 19



113111111:3133113113ol111\3011§13ﬁ31311
3135113113183131H11¥1w1313é133131ﬁu93 ||

thZta—grc‘tmah sa evc‘tyam
thZtvc‘t bhﬁtvc‘t praliyate

rc‘ttry—c‘tgame ’vas’ah pc‘wtha
prabhavaty ahar—c‘tgame

SYNONYMS

bhﬁta-gramah—the aggregate of all living entities; sah—these; eva—certainly;
ayam—this; bhﬁtvc‘t thZtvc‘I—repeatedly taking birth; praliyate—is annihilated;
rc‘ttri—of night; cigame—on the arrival; avas’ah—automatically; pc‘wtha—O son
of Prtha; prabhavati—is manifest; ahah—of daytime; cigame—on the arrival.

TRANSLATION

Again and again, When Brahmﬁ’s day arrives, all living entities come into
being, and With the arrival of Brahma’s night they are helplessly annihilated.

PURPORT

The less intelligent, who try to remain within this material world, may be
elevated to higher planets and then again must come down to this planet
earth. During the daytime of Brahma they can exhibit their activities on
higher and lower planets within this material world, but at the coming of
Brahma’s night they are all annihilated. In the day they receive various bodies
for material activities, and at night they no longer have bodies but remain
compact in the body of Visnu. Then again they are manifest at the arrival of
Brahma’s day. BhIZtUc't bhﬁtvc't pmliyate: during the day they become manifest,
and at night they are annihilated again. Ultimately, when Brahma’s life is
finished, they are all annihilated and remain unmanifest for millions and
millions of years. And when Brahma is born again in another millennium they



are again manifest. In this way they are captivated by the spell of the material
world. But those intelligent persons who take to Krsna consciousness use the
human life fully in the devotional service of the Lord, chanting Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,
Hare Hare. Thus they transfer themselves, even in this life, to the spiritual
planet of Krsna and become eternally blissful there, not being subject to such
rebirths.

TEXT 20

93613113131311521153331915333513313113131:I
31:313131111131131333'1311313133131113011

paras tasmdt tu bhc‘wo ’hyo

’vyakto ’vyaktc‘tt sahatcmah
yah sa sarvesu bhﬁtesu
has’yatsu ha vihas’yati

SYNONYMS

parah—transcendental; tasmc‘It—to that; tu—but; bhc‘wah—nature;
ahyah—another; avyaktah—unmanifest; avyaktc‘tt—to the unmanifest;
sahatahah—eternal; yah sah—that which; sarvesu—all;
bhﬁtesu—manifestation; has’yatsu—being annihilated; ha—never;
vihas’yati—is annihilated.

TRANSLATION

Yet there is another unmanifest nature, Which is eternal and is
transcendental to this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is
never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains as it
is.

PURPORT



Krsna’s superior, spiritual energy is transcendental and eternal. It is beyond
all the changes of material nature, which is manifest and annihilated during
the days and nights of Brahma. Krsna’s superior energy is completely opposite
in quality to material nature. Superior and inferior nature are explained in the
Seventh Chapter.

TEXT 21

Wsmsaﬁamgmmiwﬁm
315113131ﬁa3i$131er£1113=11111u 39 ||

avyakto ’ksara ity uktas
tam €1th paramam gatim
yam prc‘tpya ha nivartcmte
tad dhdma paramam mama

SYNONYMS

avyaktah—unmanifested; aksarah—infallible; iti—thus; uktah—is said;
tam—that; ahuh—is known; paramam—the ultimate; gatim—destination;
yam—which; prdpya—gaining; ha—never; hivartcmte—come back; tat—that;
dhdma—abode; paramam—supreme; mama—My.

TRANSLATION

That Which the Vedintists describe as unmanifest and infallible, that Which
is known as the supreme destination, that place from Which, having attained it,
one never returns—that is My supreme abode.

PURPORT

The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is described in
the Brahma—samhitd as Cintamahi—dhc‘tma, a place where all desires are fulfilled.
The supreme abode of Lord Krsna, known as Goloka Vrndavana, is full of



palaces made of touchstone. There are also trees, called “desire trees,” that
supply any type of eatable upon demand, and there are cows, known as smabhi
cows, which supply a limitless supply of milk. In this abode, the Lord is served
by hundreds of thousands of goddesses of fortune (Laksmis), and He is called
Govinda, the primal Lord and the cause of all causes. The Lord is accustomed
to blow His ﬂute (vehum kvahahtam). His transcendental form is the most
attractive in all the worlds—His eyes are like lotus petals, and the color of His
body is like the color of clouds. He is so attractive that His beauty excels that
of thousands of Cupids. He wears saffron cloth, a garland around His neck and
a peacock feather in His hair. In the Bhagavad-gitc‘t Lord Krsna gives only a
small hint of His personal abode, Goloka Vrndavana, which is the supermost
planet in the spiritual kingdom. A vivid description is given in the
Bmhma-samhita. Vedic literatures (Katha Upam'saa 1.3.11) state that there is
nothing superior to the abode of the Supreme Godhead, and that that abode is
the ultimate destination (purusc‘m ha param kiﬁcit s51 kasthc‘t paramc‘t gatih).
When one attains to it, he never returns to the material world. Krsna’s
supreme abode and Krsna Himself are nondifferent, being of the same quality.
On this earth, Vrndavana, ninety miles southeast of Delhi, is a replica of that
supreme Goloka Vrndavana located in the spiritual sky. When Krsna
descended on this earth, He sported on that particular tract of land known as
Vrndavana, comprising about eighty-four square miles in the district of

Mathura, India.

TEXT 22

gemaqe 3191339311351333131333111
3331?:3311131113118131313131813'31313113311

purusah sa parah pc‘wtha
bhaktyc‘t labhyas t1) ahahyayd

yasyc‘mtah-sthc‘mi thZtc‘mi

yena sarvam idam tatam



SYNONYMS

purusah—the Supreme Personality; sah—He; parah—the Supreme, than
whom no one is greater; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha; bhaktyc't—by devotional
service; labhyah—can be achieved; tu—but; ananyayc‘t—unalloyed,
undeviating; yasya—whom; antah—sthc‘mi—within; bhﬁtc‘mi—all of this
material manifestation; yeha—by whom; sarvam—all; idam—whatever we can
see; tatam—is pervaded.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Who is greater than all, is attainable
by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode, He is
all-pervading, and everything is situated Within Him.

PURPORT

It is here clearly stated that the supreme destination, from which there is no
return, is the abode of Krsna, the Supreme Person. The Brahma-samhita
describes this supreme abode as ahahda—cihmaya—rasa, a place where
everything is full of spiritual bliss. All the variegatedness manifest there is of
the quality of spiritual bliss—nothing there is material. That variegatedness is
expanded as the spiritual expansion of the Supreme Godhead Himself, for the
manifestation there is totally of the spiritual energy, as explained in Chapter
Seven. As far as this material world is concerned, although the Lord is always
in His supreme abode, He is nonetheless all-pervading by His material energy.
80 by His spiritual and material energies He is present everywhere—both in
the material and in the spiritual universes. Yasyc‘mtah-sthc‘mi means that
everything is sustained within Him, within either His spiritual or material
energy. The Lord is all-pervading by these two energies.

To enter Krsna’s supreme abode or the innumerable Vaikuntha planets is
possible only by bhakti, devotional service, as clearly indicated here by the
word bhaktyc't. No other process can help one attain that supreme abode. The



Vedas (Gopéla-tépani Upam'saa 3.2) also describe the supreme abode and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Eko vas’i sarva—gah krshah. In that abode
there is only one Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose name is Krsna. He is
the supreme merciful Deity, and although situated there as one He has
expanded Himself into millions and millions of plenary expansions. The Vedas
compare the Lord to a tree standing still yet bearing many varieties of fruits,
ﬂowers and changing leaves. The plenary expansions of the Lord who preside
over the Vaikuntha planets are four-armed, and they are known by a variety of
names—Purusottama, Trivikrama, Kes’ava, Madhava, Aniruddha, Hrsikes’a,
Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Sridhara, Vasudeva, Damodara, Janardana,
Narayana, Vamana, Padmanabha, etc.

The Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.37) also confirms that although the Lord is always
in the supreme abode, Goloka Vrndavana, He is all-pervading, so that
everything is going on nicely (goloka eva m'vasaty akhilc‘ttma—bhﬁtah). As stated
in the Vedas (§Vetés’vatara Upam'saa 6.8), parc‘tsya s’aktir vividhaiva s’rﬁyate/
svc‘tbhc‘wiki jﬁc‘ma—bala—kriyc‘t ca: His energies are so expansive that they
systematically conduct everything in the cosmic manifestation without a ﬂaw,
although the Supreme Lord is far, far away.

TEXT 23

WWW‘QHWH
mmﬁrémamﬁmﬁmlnu

yatra kale t1) ahavrttim

avrttim caiva yogmah
prayc‘ttc‘t yc‘mti tam kalam
vaksyc‘tmi bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

yatra—at which; kale—time; tu—and; ahavrttim—no return; avrttim—return;
ca—also; eva—certainly; yogihah—different kinds of mystics;



prayc‘ttc‘th—having departed; yc‘mti—attain; tam—that; kalam—time;
vaksyc‘tmi—I shall describe; bhamta—Tsabha—O best of the Bharatas.

TRANSLATION

0 best of the Bhiratas, I shall now explain to you the different times at
Which, passing away from this world, the yogi does or does not come back.

PURPORT

The unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Lord, who are totally surrendered
souls, do not care when they leave their bodies or by what method. They leave
everything in Krsna’s hands and so easily and happily return to Godhead. But
those who are not unalloyed devotees and who depend instead on such
methods of spiritual realization as karma—yoga, jﬁc‘ma—yoga and hatha-yoga must
leave the body at a suitable time and thereby be assured whether or not they
will return to the world of birth and death.

If the yogi is perfect he can select the time and situation for leaving this
material world. But if he is not so expert his success depends on his
accidentally passing away at a certain suitable time. The suitable times at
which one passes away and does not come back are explained by the Lord in
the next verse. According to Acarya Baladeva Vidyabhﬂsana, the Sanskrit
word kala used herein refers to the presiding deity of time.

TEXT 24

W:%:WWI
mmmwaﬂﬁﬁiwumeu

agm'r jyotir ahah s’uklah

sah—mc‘tsc‘t uttarciyaham

tatra prayc‘ttc‘t gacchcmti
brahma brahma—vido jahc‘th



SYNONYMS

agm'h—fire; jyotih—light; ahah—day; s’uklah—the white fortnight;
sat—mc‘tsc‘th—the six months; uttara-aycmam—when the sun passes on the
northern side; tatra—there; prayc‘ttc‘th—those who pass away; gacchcmti—go;
brahma—to the Absolute; brahma—vidah—who know the Absolute;
jahc'th—persons.

TRANSLATION

Those Who know the Supreme Brahman attain that Supreme by passing
away from the world during the influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an
auspicious moment of the day, during the fortnight of the waxing moon, or
during the six months When the sun travels in the north.

PURPORT

When fire, light, day and the fortnight of the moon are mentioned, it is to
be understood that over all of them there are various presiding deities who
make arrangements for the passage of the soul. At the time of death, the mind
carries one on the path to a new life. If one leaves the body at the time
designated above, either accidentally or by arrangement, it is possible for him
to attain the impersonal brahmajyoti. Mystics who are advanced in yoga
practice can arrange the time and place to leave the body. Others have no
control—if by accident they leave at an auspicious moment, then they will not
return to the cycle of birth and death, but otherwise there is every possibility
that they will have to return. However, for the pure devotee in Krsna
consciousness, there is no fear of returning, whether he leaves the body at an
auspicious or inauspicious moment, by accident or arrangement.

TEXT 25

@aﬁamw:wwafﬁvml



mWﬁiﬁﬁhﬁmﬁaﬁﬁuwu

dhﬁmo rc‘ttris tathd krshah

sah—mc‘tsc‘t daksihc‘tyaham

tatra cc‘mdramasam jyotir
yogi prc‘tpya m'vartate

SYNONYMS

dhﬁmah—smoke; rc‘ttrih—night; tathc‘t—also; krshah—the fortnight of the dark
moon; sat—mc‘tsc‘th—the six months; daksiha-ayaham—when the sun passes on
the southern side; tatra—there; cc‘mdra-masam—the moon planet; jyotih—the
light; yogi—the mystic; prc‘tpya—achieving; hivartate—comes back.

TRANSLATION

The mystic Who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night,
the fortnight of the waning moon, or the six months When the sun passes to the
south reaches the moon planet but again comes back.

PURPORT

In the Third Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam Kapila Muni mentions that
those who are expert in fruitive activities and sacrificial methods on earth
attain to the moon at death. These elevated souls live on the moon for about
10,000 years (by demigod calculations) and enjoy life by drinking soma-Tasa.
They eventually return to earth. This means that on the moon there are
higher classes of living beings, though they may not be perceived by the gross
senses.

TEXT 26

wwaﬁmwnaﬁﬁu



wumqﬁmmﬁﬁgﬁnmau

s’ukla—krshe gati hy ete
jagatah s’c‘ts’vate mate

ekayc‘t yc‘tty ahavrttim
anyayc‘wartate punah

SYNONYMS

s’ukla—light; krshe—and darkness; gati—ways of passing; hi—certainly;
ete—these two; jagatah—of the material world; s’c‘ts’vate—of the Vedas;
mate—in the opinion; ekayc‘t—by one; yc‘tti—goes; cmavrttim—to no return;
anyayc‘t—by the other; c‘wartate—comes back; puhah—again.

TRANSLATION

According to Vedic opinion, there are two ways of passing from this
world—one in light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does not
come back; but When one passes in darkness, he returns.

PURPORT

The same description of departure and return is quoted by Acarya Baladeva
Vidyabhﬂsana from the Cbéndogya Upam'saa (5.10.3—5). Those who are
fruitive laborers and philosophical speculators from time immemorial are
constantly going and coming. Actually they do not attain ultimate salvation,
for they do not surrender to Krsna.

TEXT 27

33131931111131311312113111131131331311
WWWWIImII

haite srti pc‘wtha jc‘mcm



yogi muhyati kas’ccma
tasmc‘tt sarvesu kalesu
yoga—yukto bhavc‘trjuha

SYNONYMS

ha—never; ete—these two; srti—different paths; pc‘wtha—O son of Prtha;
jc‘mah—even if he knows; yogi—the devotee of the Lord; muhyati—is
bewildered; kas’ccma—any; tasmc‘It—therefore; sarvesu kalesu—always;
yoga-yuktah—engaged in Krsna consciousness; bhaUa—just become;
arjuha—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

Although the devotees know these two paths, 0 Arjuna, they are never
bewildered. Therefore be always fixed in devotion.

PURPORT

Krsna is here advising Arjuna that he should not be disturbed by the
different paths the soul can take when leaving the material world. A devotee
of the Supreme Lord should not worry whether he will depart by arrangement
or by accident. The devotee should be firmly established in Krsna
consciousness and chant Hare Krsna. He should know that concern over
either of these two paths is troublesome. The best way to be absorbed in Krsna
consciousness is to be always dovetailed in His service, and this will make one’s
path to the spiritual kingdom safe, certain and direct. The word yoga-yukta is
especially significant in this verse. One who is firm in yoga is constantly
engaged in Krsna consciousness in all his activities. Sri Rfipa Gosvami advises,
ahasaktasya visayc‘m yathc‘trham upayuﬁjatah: one should be unattached in
material affairs and do everything in Krsna consciousness. By this system,
which is called yukta-vairc‘tgya, one attains perfection. Therefore the devotee is
not disturbed by these descriptions, because he knows that his passage to the
supreme abode is guaranteed by devotional service.



TEXT 28

33612131331333
meI
33383333838831

31311113331131113131311311113311

vedesu yajﬁesu tapahsu caiva
dc‘mesu yat punya—phalam pradistam

atyeti tat sarvam idam viditvc‘t
yogi param sthc‘mam upaiti cc‘tdyam

SYNONYMS

vedesu—in the study of the Vedas; yajﬁesu—in the performances of yajﬁa,
sacrifice; tapahsu—in undergoing different types of austerities; ca—also;
eva—certainly; dc‘mesu—in giving charities; yat—that which;
punya—phalam—result of pious work; pradistam—indicated; atyeti—surpasses;
tat sarvam—all those; idam—this; Uiditvc‘t—knowing; yogi—the devotee;
param—supreme; sthc‘mam—abode; upaiti—achieves; ca—also;
cidyam—original.

TRANSLATION

A person Who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the
results derived from studying the Vedas, performing austere sacrifices, giving
charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. Simply by performing
devotional service, he attains all these, and at the end he reaches the supreme
eternal abode.

PURPORT

This verse is the summation of the Seventh and Eighth chapters, which



particularly deal with Krsna consciousness and devotional service. One has to
study the Vedas under the guidance of the spiritual master and undergo many
austerities and penances while living under his care. A brahmacc‘wi has to live
in the home of the spiritual master just like a servant, and he must beg alms
from door to door and bring them to the spiritual master. He takes food only
under the master’s order, and if the master neglects to call the student for food
that day, the student fasts. These are some of the Vedic principles for
observing brahmacarya.

After the student studies the Vedas under the master for a period from five
to twenty years, he may become a man of perfect character. Study of the Vedas
is not meant for the recreation of armchair speculators, but for the formation
of character. After this training, the brahmacc‘wi is allowed to enter into
household life and marry. When he is a householder, he has to perform many
sacrifices so that he may achieve further enlightenment. He must also give
charity according to the country, time and candidate, discriminating among
charity in goodness, in passion and in ignorance, as described in Bhagavad-gitc‘t.
Then after retiring from household life, upon accepting the order of
Uahapmstha, he undergoes severe penances—living in forests, dressing with
tree bark, not shaving, etc. By carrying out the orders of brahmacarya,
householder life, vc‘maprastha and finally scmhyc‘tsa, one becomes elevated to
the perfectional stage of life. Some are then elevated to the heavenly
kingdoms, and when they become even more advanced they are liberated in
the spiritual sky, either in the impersonal brahmajyoti or in the Vaikuntha
planets or Krsnaloka. This is the path outlined by Vedic literatures.

The beauty of Krsna consciousness, however, is that by one stroke, by
engaging in devotional service, one can surpass all the rituals of the different
orders of life.

The words idam Uiditvc't indicate that one should understand the
instructions given by Sri Krsna in this chapter and the Seventh Chapter of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. One should try to understand these chapters not by scholarship
or mental speculation but by hearing them in association with devotees.
Chapters Seven through Twelve are the essence of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The first six
and the last six chapters are like coverings for the middle six chapters, which



are especially protected by the Lord. If one is fortunate enough to understand
Bhagavad-gitc‘t—especially these middle six chapters—in the association of
devotees, then his life at once becomes glorified beyond all penances,
sacrifices, charities, speculations, etc., for one can achieve all the results of
these activities simply by Krsna consciousness.

One who has a little faith in Bhagavad-gitc‘t should learn Bhagavad-gitc‘t from
a devotee, because in the beginning of the Fourth Chapter it is stated clearly
that Bhagavad-gitc‘t can be understood only by devotees; no one else can
perfectly understand the purpose of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. One should therefore learn
Bhagavad-gitc‘t from a devotee of Krsna, not from mental speculators. This is a
sign of faith. When one searches for a devotee and finally gets a devotee’s
association one actually begins to study and understand Bhagavad-gitc‘t. By
advancement in the association of the devotee one is placed in devotional
service, and this service dispels all one’s misgivings about Krsna, or God, and
Krsna’s activities, form, pastimes, name and other features. After these
misgivings have been perfectly cleared away, one becomes fixed in one’s study.
Then one relishes the study of Bhagavad-gitc‘t and attains the state of feeling
always Krsna conscious. In the advanced stage, one falls completely in love
with Krsna. This highest perfectional stage of life enables the devotee to be
transferred to Krsna’s abode in the spiritual sky, Goloka Vrndavana, where the
devotee becomes eternally happy.

Thus end the Bhaktivedahta Purports to the Eighth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Attaining the Supreme.

 

The Most Confidential Knowledge



TEXT 1

. al'mé'ﬂa'm
33: a 31 31313111 93193113313531
31131 13131131311331 3133113311 11133318911411" 9 ||

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
idam tu te guhyatamam
pravaksycimy ahasﬁyave
jﬁc‘mam vijﬁdha—sahitam
yaj jﬁc‘ttvc‘t moksyase ’s’ubhc‘tt

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; idam—this;
tu—but; te—unto you; guhya—tamam—the most confidential; pravaksyc‘tmi—I
am speaking; ahasﬁyave—to the nonenvious; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
vijﬁc‘ma—realized knowledge; sahitam—with; yat—which; jﬁc‘ttvc‘I—knowing;
moksyase—you will be released; as’ubhc'tt—from this miserable material
existence.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, because you are
never envious of Me, I shall impart to you this most confidential knowledge and
realization, knowing Which you shall be relieved of the miseries of material
existence.

PURPORT

As a devotee hears more and more about the Supreme Lord, he becomes
enlightened. This hearing process is recommended in the Srimad-Bhagavatam:
“The messages of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are full of potencies,
and these potencies can be realized if topics regarding the Supreme Godhead



are discussed amongst devotees. This cannot be achieved by the association of
mental speculators or academic scholars, for it is realized knowledge.”

The devotees are constantly engaged in the Supreme Lord’s service. The
Lord understands the mentality and sincerity of a particular living entity who
is engaged in Krsna consciousness and gives him the intelligence to
understand the science of Krsna in the association of devotees. Discussion of
Krsna is very potent, and if a fortunate person has such association and tries to
assimilate the knowledge, then he will surely make advancement toward
spiritual realization. Lord Krsna, in order to encourage Arjuna to higher and
higher elevation in His potent service, describes in this Ninth Chapter matters
more confidential than any He has already disclosed.

The very beginning of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the First Chapter, is more or less an
introduction to the rest of the book; and in the Second and Third chapters,
the spiritual knowledge described is called confidential. Topics discussed in the
Seventh and Eighth chapters are specifically related to devotional service, and
because they bring enlightenment in Krsna consciousness, they are called
more confidential. But the matters which are described in the Ninth Chapter
deal with unalloyed, pure devotion. Therefore this is called the most
confidential. One who is situated in the most confidential knowledge of Krsna
is naturally transcendental; he therefore has no material pangs, although he is
in the material world. In the Bhakti-rasc‘tmrta—sihdhu it is said that although
one who has a sincere desire to render loving service to the Supreme Lord is
situated in the conditional state of material existence, he is to be considered
liberated. Similarly, we shall find in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t, Tenth Chapter, that
anyone who is engaged in that way is a liberated person.

Now this first verse has specific significance. The words idam jﬁc‘mam (“this
knowledge”) refer to pure devotional service, which consists of nine different
activities: hearing, chanting, remembering, serving, worshiping, praying,
obeying, maintaining friendship and surrendering everything. By the practice
of these nine elements of devotional service one is elevated to spiritual
consciousness, Krsna consciousness. When one’s heart is thus cleared of
material contamination, one can understand this science of Krsna. Simply to
understand that a living entity is not material is not sufficient. That may be



the beginning of spiritual realization, but one should recognize the difference
between activities of the body and the spiritual activities of one who
understands that he is not the body.

In the Seventh Chapter we have already discussed the opulent potency of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His different energies, the inferior and
superior natures, and all this material manifestation. Now in Chapter Nine the
glories of the Lord will be delineated.

The Sanskrit word ahasﬁyave in this verse is also very significant. Generally
the commentators, even if they are highly scholarly, are all envious of Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even the most erudite scholars write on
Bhagavad-gitc‘t very inaccurately. Because they are envious of Krsna, their
commentaries are useless. The commentaries given by devotees of the Lord are
bona fide. No one can explain Bhagavad-gitc‘t or give perfect knowledge of
Krsna if he is envious. One who criticizes the character of Krsna without
knowing Him is a fool. 80 such commentaries should be very carefully avoided.
For one who understands that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the pure and transcendental Personality, these chapters will be very beneficial.

TEXT 2

WWWI
WWWWWIIQII

rc‘tja—vidyc‘t rc‘tja—guhyam
pavitram idam uttamam
pratyakscivagamam dharmyam
su—sukham kartum avyayam

SYNONYMS

rc‘tja—vidyci—the king of education; rc‘tja-guhyam—the king of confidential
knowledge; pavitram—the purest; idam—this; uttamam—transcendental;
pratyaksa—by direct experience; avagamam—understood; dharmyam—the



principle of religion; su-sukham—very happy; kartum—to execute;
avyayam—everlasting.

TRANSLATION

This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all secrets. It is
the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct perception of the self by
realization, it is the perfection of religion. It is everlasting, and it is joyfully
performed.

PURPORT

This chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘t is called the king of education because it is
the essence of all doctrines and philosophies explained before. Among the
principal philosophers in India are Gautama, Kanada, Kapila, Yajﬁavalkya,
Sandilya and Vais’vanara. And finally there is Vyasadeva, the author of the
Vedc'mta-sﬁti'a. So there is no dearth of knowledge in the field of philosophy or
transcendental knowledge. Now the Lord says that this Ninth Chapter is the
king of all such knowledge, the essence of all knowledge that can be derived
from the study of the Vedas and different kinds of philosophy. It is the most
confidential because confidential or transcendental knowledge involves
understanding the difference between the soul and the body. And the king of
all confidential knowledge culminates in devotional service.

Generally, people are not educated in this confidential knowledge; they are
educated in external knowledge. As far as ordinary education is concerned,
people are involved with so many departments: politics, sociology, physics,
chemistry, mathematics, astronomy, engineering, etc. There are so many
departments of knowledge all over the world and many huge universities, but
there is, unfortunately, no university or educational institution where the
science of the spirit soul is instructed. Yet the soul is the most important part
of the body; without the presence of the soul, the body has no value. Still
people are placing great stress on the bodily necessities of life, not caring for
the vital soul.

The Bhagavad-gitc‘t, especially from the Second Chapter on, stresses the



importance of the soul. In the very beginning, the Lord says that this body is
perishable and that the soul is not perishable (antavcmta ime dehc‘t hityasyoktc‘th
s’aririhah). That is a confidential part of knowledge: simply knowing that the
spirit soul is different from this body and that its nature is immutable,
indestructible and eternal. But that gives no positive information about the
soul. Sometimes people are under the impression that the soul is different from
the body and that when the body is finished, or one is liberated from the body,
the soul remains in a void and becomes impersonal. But actually that is not the
fact. How can the soul, which is so active within this body, be inactive after
being liberated from the body? It is always active. If it is eternal, then it is
eternally active, and its activities in the spiritual kingdom are the most
confidential part of spiritual knowledge. These activities of the spirit soul are
therefore indicated here as constituting the king of all knowledge, the most
confidential part of all knowledge.

This knowledge is the purest form of all activities, as explained in Vedic
literature. In the Padma Purc‘ma, man’s sinful activities have been analyzed and
are shown to be the results of sin after sin. Those who are engaged in fruitive
activities are entangled in different stages and forms of sinful reactions. For
instance, when the seed of a particular tree is sown, the tree does not appear
immediately to grow; it takes some time. It is first a small, sprouting plant, then
it assumes the form of a tree, then it ﬂowers and bears fruit, and, when it is
complete, the ﬂowers and fruits are enjoyed by persons who have sown the
seed of the tree. Similarly, a man performs a sinful act, and like a seed it takes
time to fructify. There are different stages. The sinful action may have already
stopped within the individual, but the results or the fruit of that sinful action
are still to be enjoyed. There are sins which are still in the form of a seed, and
there are others which are already fructified and are giving us fruit, which we
are enjoying as distress and pain.

As explained in the twenty-eighth verse of the Seventh Chapter, a person
who has completely ended the reactions of all sinful activities and who is fully
engaged in pious activities, being freed from the duality of this material world,
becomes engaged in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna. In other words, those who are actually engaged in the



devotional service of the Supreme Lord are already freed from all reactions.
This statement is confirmed in the Padma Purc‘ma:

aprarabdha—phalam papam
katam bijam phalonmukham
kramehaiva praliyeta
vishu—bhakti—ratc‘ttmam‘tm

For those who are engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, all sinful reactions, whether fructified, in the stock, or
in the form of a seed, gradually vanish. Therefore the purifying potency of
devotional service is very strong, and it is called paviti‘am uttamam, the purest.
Uttama means transcendental. Tamas means this material world or darkness,
and uttama means that which is transcendental to material activities.
Devotional activities are never to be considered material, although sometimes
it appears that devotees are engaged just like ordinary men. One who can see
and is familiar with devotional service will know that they are not material
activities. They are all spiritual and devotional, uncontaminated by the
material modes of nature.

It is said that the execution of devotional service is so perfect that one can
perceive the results directly. This direct result is actually perceived, and we
have practical experience that any person who is chanting the holy names of
Krsna (Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare) in course of chanting without offenses feels
some transcendental pleasure and very quickly becomes purified of all material
contamination. This is actually seen. Furthermore, if one engages not only in
hearing but in trying to broadcast the message of devotional activities as well,
or if he engages himself in helping the missionary activities of Krsna
consciousness, he gradually feels spiritual progress. This advancement in
spiritual life does not depend on any kind of previous education or
qualification. The method itself is so pure that by simply engaging in it one
becomes pure.

In the Vedénta-sﬁtra (3.2.26) this is also described in the following words:
prakc‘ts’as’ ca karmahy abhyc‘tsc‘tt. “Devotional service is so potent that simply by



engaging in the activities of devotional service one becomes enlightened
without a doubt.” A practical example of this can be seen in the previous life
of Narada, who in that life happened to be the son of a maidservant. He had
no education, nor was he born into a high family. But when his mother was
engaged in serving great devotees, Narada also became engaged, and
sometimes, in the absence of his mother, he would serve the great devotees
himself. Narada personally says,

ucchista—lepc‘m ahumodito dvijaih
sakrt sma bhuﬁje tad—apc‘tsta—kilbisah
evam pravrttasya vis’uddha—cetasas
tad—dharma evc‘ttma—mcih prajc‘tyate

In this verse from grimad-Bbégavatam (1.5.25) Narada describes his previous
life to his disciple Vyasadeva. He says that while engaged as a boy servant for
those purified devotees during the four months of their stay, he was intimately
associating with them. Sometimes those sages left remnants of food on their
dishes, and the boy, who would wash their dishes, wanted to taste the
remnants. So he asked the great devotees for their permission, and when they
gave it Narada ate those remnants and consequently became freed from all
sinful reactions. As he went on eating, he gradually became as pure-hearted as
the sages. The great devotees relished the taste of unceasing devotional service
to the Lord by hearing and chanting, and Narada gradually developed the
same taste. Narada says further,

tatrcihvaham krsha—kathc‘th pragc‘tyatc‘tm
ahugrahehc‘ts’mavam mahoharc‘th

tc‘th s’raddhayc‘t me ’hupadam vis’mvatah

priyas’ravasy ahga mamabhavad rucih

By associating with the sages, Narada got the taste for hearing and chanting
the glories of the Lord, and he developed a great desire for devotional service.
Therefore, as described in the Vedanta—sﬁtra, prakc‘ts’as’ ca karmahy abhyc‘tsc‘tt: if
one is engaged simply in the acts of devotional service, everything is revealed
to him automatically, and he can understand. This is called pratyaksa, directly



perceived.

The word dharmyam means “the path of religion.” Narada was actually a
son of a maidservant. He had no opportunity to go to school. He was simply
assisting his mother, and fortunately his mother rendered some service to the
devotees. The child Narada also got the opportunity and simply by association
achieved the highest goal of all religion. The highest goal of all religion is
devotional service, as stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (sa vai pumsam paro
dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje). Religious people generally do not know that
the highest perfection of religion is the attainment of devotional service. As
we have already discussed in regard to the last verse of Chapter Eight (vedesu
yajnesu tapahsu caiva), generally Vedic knowledge is required for
self-realization. But here, although Narada never went to the school of the
spiritual master and was not educated in the Vedic principles, he acquired the
highest results of Vedic study. This process is so potent that even without
performing the religious process regularly, one can be raised to the highest
perfection. How is this possible? This is also confirmed in Vedic literature:
acaryavc‘tn puruso veda. One who is in association with great acc‘wyas, even if he
is not educated or has never studied the Vedas, can become familiar with all
the knowledge necessary for realization.

The process of devotional service is a very happy one (susukham). Why.7
Devotional service consists of s’ravanam kirtanam Uisnoh [SB 7.5.23], so one can
simply hear the chanting of the glories of the Lord or can attend philosophical
lectures on transcendental knowledge given by authorized cicc'wyas. Simply by
sitting, one can learn; then one can eat the remnants of the food offered to
God, nice palatable dishes. In every state devotional service is joyful. One can
execute devotional service even in the most poverty-stricken condition. The
Lord says, patram puspam phalam toyam: He is ready to accept from the
devotee any kind of offering, never mind what. Even a leaf, a ﬂower, a bit of
fruit, or a little water, which are all available in every part of the world, can be
offered by amJ person, regardless of social position, and will be accepted if
offered with love. There are many instances in history. Simply by tasting the
tulasi leaves offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, great sages like Sanat-kumara
became great devotees. Therefore the devotional process is very nice, and it



can be executed in a happy mood. God accepts only the love with which things
are offered to Him.

It is said here that this devotional service is eternally existing. It is not as
the Mayavadi philosophers claim. Although they sometimes take to so-called
devotional service, their idea is that as long as they are not liberated they will
continue their devotional service, but at the end, when they become liberated,
they will “become one with God.” Such temporary time-serving devotional
service is not accepted as pure devotional service. Actual devotional service
continues even after liberation. When the devotee goes to the spiritual planet
in the kingdom of God, he is also engaged there in serving the Supreme Lord.
He does not try to become one with the Supreme Lord.

As will be seen in Bhagavad-gitc‘t, actual devotional service begins after
liberation. After one is liberated, when one is situated in the Brahman
position (brahma—bhnta), one’s devotional service begins (samah sarvesu
bhntesu mad—bhaktim labhate parc‘tm). No one can understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by executing karma—yoga, jnc‘tna—yoga, astc‘tnga—yoga or
any other yoga independently. By these yogic methods one may make a little
progress toward bhakti-yoga, but without coming to the stage of devotional
service one cannot understand what is the Personality of Godhead. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam it is also confirmed that when one becomes purified by
executing the process of devotional service, especially by hearing
Srimad-Bhagavatam or Bhagavad-gitc‘t from realized souls, then he can
understand the science of Krsna, or the science of God. Evam
prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti yogatah. When one’s heart is cleared of all
nonsense, then one can understand what God is. Thus the process of
devotional service, of Krsna consciousness, is the king of all education and the
king of all confidential knowledge. It is the purest form of religion, and it can
be executed joyfully without difficulty. Therefore one should adopt it.

TEXT 3

3133:3131:qu33-3111



WWWWII3II

as’raddadhc‘tnc‘th purusc‘t
dharmasyc‘tsya parantapa
aprc‘tpya mam nivartante
mrtyu—samscim—vartmani

SYNONYMS

as’raddadhc‘tnc‘th—those who are faithless; purusdh—such persons;
dharmasya—toward the process of religion; asya—this; parantapa—O killer of
the enemies; aprc‘tpya—without obtaining; mam—Me; nivartante—come back;
mrtyu—of death; samsc‘tra—in material existence; vartmani—on the path.

TRANSLATION

Those Who are not faithful in this devotional service cannot attain Me, O
conqueror of enemies. Therefore they return to the path of birth and death in
this material world.

PURPORT

The faithless cannot accomplish this process of devotional service; that is
the purport of this verse. Faith is created by association with devotees.
Unfortunate people, even after hearing all the evidence of Vedic literature
from great personalities, still have no faith in God. They are hesitant and
cannot stay fixed in the devotional service of the Lord. Thus faith is a most
important factor for progress in Krsna consciousness. In the
Caitanya—caritc‘tmrta it is said that faith is the complete conviction that simply
by serving the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, one can achieve all perfection. That is

called real faith. As stated in the grimad-Bbégavatam (4.31.14),

yathc‘t taror mﬁla-nisecanena
trpyanti tat—skandha—bhujopas’c‘tkhc‘th
prc‘tnopahc‘m‘tc ca yathendriyc‘tnc‘tm



tathaiva sarvc‘trhanam acyutejyci

“By giving water to the root of a tree one satisfies its branches, twigs and
leaves, and by supplying food to the stomach one satisfies all the senses of the
body. Similarly, by engaging in the transcendental service of the Supreme Lord
one automatically satisfies all the demigods and all other living entities.”
Therefore, after reading Bhagavad-gitc‘t one should promptly come to the
conclusion of Bhagavad-gitc‘t: one should give up all other engagements and
adopt the service of the Supreme Lord, Krsna, the Personality of Godhead. If
one is convinced of this philosophy of life, that is faith.

Now, the development of that faith is the process of Krsna consciousness.
There are three divisions of Krsna conscious men. In the third class are those
who have no faith. Even if they are officially engaged in devotional service,
they cannot achieve the highest perfectional stage. Most probably they will
slip, after some time. They may become engaged, but because they haven’t
complete conviction and faith, it is very difficult for them to continue in
Krsna consciousness. We have practical experience in discharging our
missionary activity that some people come and apply themselves to Krsna
consciousness with some hidden motive, and as soon as they are economically a
little well situated they give up this process and take to their old ways again. It
is only by faith that one can advance in Krsna consciousness. As far as the
development of faith is concerned, one who is well versed in the literatures of
devotional service and has attained the stage of firm faith is called a first-class
person in Krsna consciousness. And in the second class are those who are not
very advanced in understanding the devotional scriptures but who
automatically have firm faith that krsna-bhakti, or service to Krsna, is the best
course and so in good faith have taken it up. Thus they are superior to the
third class, who have neither perfect knowledge of the scriptures nor good
faith but by association and simplicity are trying to follow. The third-class
person in Krsna consciousness may fall down, but when one is in the second
class he does not fall down, and for the first-class person in Krsna
consciousness there is no chance of falling down. One in the first class will
surely make progress and achieve the result at the end. As far as the third-class
person in Krsna consciousness is concerned, although he has faith in the



conviction that devotional service to Krsna is very good, he has not yet gained
adequate knowledge of Krsna through the scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam
and Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Sometimes these third-class persons in Krsna consciousness
have some tendency toward karma—yoga and jnc‘tna-yoga, and sometimes they
are disturbed, but as soon as the infection of karma—yoga or jnc‘Ina—yoga is
vanquished, they become second-class or first-class persons in Krsna
consciousness. Faith in Krsna is also divided into three stages and described in
Srimad-Bhagavatam. First-class attachment, second-class attachment and
third-class attachment are also explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam in the
Eleventh Canto. Those who have no faith even after hearing about Krsna and
the excellence of devotional service, who think that it is simply eulogy, find
the path very difficult, even if they are supposedly engaged in devotional
service. For them there is very little hope of gaining perfection. Thus faith is
very important in the discharge of devotional service.

TEXT 4

wmﬁdaﬁaﬁmﬁiﬁm
33838331131183313‘3813113331211811

mayc‘t tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyakta—mmtinc‘t

mat-sthc‘tni sarva—bhntc‘tni

na cc‘tham tesv avasthitah

SYNONYMS

maya—by Me; tatam—pervaded; idam—this; sarvam—all; jagat—cosmic
manifestation; avyakta-mmtinc‘t—by the unmanifested form; mat—sthc‘tni—in
Me; sarva-bhntc‘tni—all living entities; na—not; ca—also; aham—I; tesu—in
them; avasthitah—situated.

TRANSLATION



By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross
material senses. It is said,

atah s’ri-krsna—nc‘tmc‘tdi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvc‘tdau

svayam eva sphmaty adah
(Bbakti—rasémrta-smdbu 1.2.234)

Lord Sri Krsna’s name, fame, pastimes, etc., cannot be understood by
material senses. Only to one who is engaged in pure devotional service under
proper guidance is He revealed. In the Brabma-san'ibité (5.38) it is stated,
premanjana—cchurita-bhakti—Uilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu Uilokayanti: one
can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always within himself
and outside himself if one has developed the transcendental loving attitude
towards Him. Thus for people in general He is not visible. Here it is said that
although He is all-pervading, everywhere present, He is not conceivable by the
material senses. This is indicated here by the word avyakta-mmtina. But
actually, although we cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him. As we
have discussed in the Seventh Chapter, the entire material cosmic
manifestation is only a combination of His two different energies—the
superior, spiritual energy and the inferior, material energy. Just as the sunshine
is spread all over the universe, the energy of the Lord is spread all over the
creation, and everything is resting in that energy.

Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has lost
His personal existence. To refute such an argument the Lord says, “I am
everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof.” For example, a king
heads a government which is but the manifestation of the king’s energy; the
different governmental departments are nothing but the energies of the king,



and each department is resting on the king’s power. But still one cannot
expect the king to be present in every department personally. That is a crude
example. Similarly, all the manifestations that we see and everything that
exists, both in this material world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by
the diffusion of His different energies, and, as stated in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t,
vistabhyc‘tham idam krtsnam: He is everywhere present by His personal
representation, the diffusion of His different energies.

TEXT 5

Hamﬁwﬁﬁmﬁﬁmﬁaml
WHWWWHIRII

na ca mat—sthc‘tni thZtc‘Ini

pas’ya me yogam ais’varam
bhnta-bhrn na ca bhnta—stho
mama‘ttmc‘t thZta—bhcivanah

SYNONYMS

na—never; ca—also; mat—sthc‘tni—situated in Me; bhntc‘tni—all creation;
pas’ya—just see; me—My; yogam ais’varam—inconceivable mystic power;
bhﬁta-tht—the maintainer of all living entities; na—never; ca—also;
bhnta—sthah—in the cosmic manifestation; mama—My; citmci—Self;
bhﬁta-bhc'wanah—the source of all manifestations.

TRANSLATION

And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic
opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities and although I am
everywhere, I am not a part of this cosmic manifestation, for My Self is the
very source of creation.



PURPORT

The Lord says that everything is resting on Him (mat-sthc‘tni sarva-bhntc‘tni).
This should not be misunderstood. The Lord is not directly concerned with the
maintenance and sustenance of this material manifestation. Sometimes we see
a picture of Atlas holding the globe on his shoulders; he seems to be very tired,
holding this great earthly planet. Such an image should not be entertained in
connection with Krsna’s upholding this created universe. He says that
although everything is resting on Him, He is aloof. The planetary systems are
ﬂoating in space, and this space is the energy of the Supreme Lord. But He is
different from space. He is differently situated. Therefore the Lord says,
“Although they are situated on My inconceivable energy, as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead I am aloof from them.” This is the inconceivable
opulence of the Lord.

In the Nirukti Vedic dictionary it is said, yujyate ’nena durghatesu karyesu:
“The Supreme Lord is performing inconceivably wonderful pastimes,
displaying His energy.” His person is full of different potent energies, and His
determination is itself actual fact. In this way the Personality of Godhead is to
be understood. We may think of doing something, but there are so many
impediments, and sometimes it is not possible to do as we like. But when Krsna
wants to do something, simply by His willing, everything is performed so
perfectly that one cannot imagine how it is being done. The Lord explains this
fact: although He is the maintainer and sustainer of the entire material
manifestation, He does not touch this material manifestation. Simply by His
supreme will, everything is created, everything is sustained, everything is
maintained, and everything is annihilated. There is no difference between His
mind and Himself (as there is a difference between ourselves and our present
material mind) because He is absolute spirit. Simultaneously the Lord is
present in everything; yet the common man cannot understand how He is also
present personally. He is different from this material manifestation, yet
everything is resting on Him. This is explained here as yogam ais’vamm, the
mystic power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.



TEXT 6

uwmwmzaaiauﬁmI
amaaihrﬁﬁwmqq‘musu

yathc‘tkc‘ts’a—sthito nityam

1151th sarvatra—go mahc‘tn
tathd sarvc‘tni thZtc‘Ini

mat—sthc‘tnity upadhc‘traya

SYNONYMS

yathc‘I—just as; akas’a—sthitah—situated in the sky; nityam—always; vciyuh—the
wind; sarvatra—gah—blowing everywhere; mahc‘In—great; tathc‘I—similarly;
sarvc‘tni thZtc‘Ini—all created beings; mat-sthc‘tni—situated in Me; iti—thus;
upadhc‘traya—try to understand.

TRANSLATION

Understand that as the mighty Wind, blowing everywhere, rests always in
the sky, all created beings rest in Me.

PURPORT

For the ordinary person it is almost inconceivable how the huge material
creation is resting in Him. But the Lord is giving an example which may help
us to understand. The sky may be the biggest manifestation we can conceive.
And in that sky the wind or air is the biggest manifestation in the cosmic
world. The movement of the air influences the movements of everything. But
although the wind is great, it is still situated within the sky; the wind is not
beyond the sky. Similarly, all the wonderful cosmic manifestations are existing
by the supreme will of God, and all of them are subordinate to that supreme
will. As we generally say, not a blade of grass moves without the will of the



Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus everything is moving under His will:
by His will everything is being created, everything is being maintained, and
everything is being annihilated. Still He is aloof from everything, as the sky is
always aloof from the activities of the wind.

In the Upanisads it is stated, yad—bhisc‘t vc‘ttah pavate: “It is out of the fear of
the Supreme Lord that the wind is blowing.” (T ar’ttr'ﬁya Upam'saa 2.8.1) In the
Brbad—éranyaka Upam'saa (3.8.9) it is stated, etasya 1151 aksarasya pras’c‘tsane gc‘trgi
smya—candramasau vidhrtau tisthata etasya 1151 aksarasya pras’c‘tsane gc‘trgi
dyav-c‘tprthivyau vidhrtau tisthatah. “By the supreme order, under the
superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the moon, the sun,
and the other great planets are moving.” In the Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.52) also it is
stated,

yac—caksm esa savitc‘t sakala—grahc‘tnc‘tm
rc‘tjci samasta-sma—mmtir as’esa—tejc‘th
yasyc‘tjnayci bhramati sambhrta—kc‘tla—cakro
govindam adi—pmusam tam aham bhajdmi

This is a description of the movement of the sun. It is said that the sun is
considered to be one of the eyes of the Supreme Lord and that it has immense
potency to diffuse heat and light. Still it is moving in its prescribed orbit by the
order and the supreme will of Govinda. So, from the Vedic literature we can
find evidence that this material manifestation, which appears to us to be very
wonderful and great, is under the complete control of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This will be further explained in the later verses of this chapter.

TEXT 7

ﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁaﬁﬁfmﬁaml
mﬁwﬁmﬁmueu

sarva—bhntdni kaunteya
prakrtim yc‘tnti mamikc‘tm
kalpa-ksaye punas tc‘Ini



kalpcidau visrjcimy aham

SYNONYMS

sarva-bhntc‘tni—all created entities; kaunteya—O son of Kunti;
prakrtim—nature; yc‘tnti—enter; mcimikc‘tm—My; kalpa-ksaye—at the end of
the millennium; punah—again; tc'tni—all those; kalpa-c'tdau—in the beginning
of the millennium; visrjc‘tmi—create; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Kunti, at the end of the millennium all material manifestations
enter into My nature, and at the beginning of another millennium, by My
potency, I create them again.

PURPORT

The creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material cosmic
manifestation are completely dependent on the supreme will of the Personality
of Godhead. “At the end of the millennium” means at the death of Brahma.
Brahma lives for one hundred years, and his one day is calculated at
4,300,000,000 of our earthly years. His night is of the same duration. His
month consists of thirty such days and nights, and his year of twelve months.
After one hundred such years, when Brahma dies, the devastation or
annihilation takes place; this means that the energy manifested by the
Supreme Lord is again wound up in Himself. Then again, when there is a need
to manifest the cosmic world, it is done by His will. Bahu syc‘tm: “Although I am
one, I shall become many.” This is the Vedic aphorism (Cbéndogya Upam'sad
6.2.3). He expands Himself in this material energy, and the whole cosmic
manifestation again takes place.

TEXT 8

WWﬁlﬂﬁﬂfP-iﬂﬁzﬂﬁzl



WWWII‘H

prakrtim svc‘tm avastabhya
visrjdmi punah punah
thZta—grc‘tmam imam krtsnam
avas’am prakrter vas’c‘tt

SYNONYMS

prakrtim—the material nature; svc‘tm—of My personal Self;
avastabhya—entering into; visrjc‘tmi—I create; punah punah—again and again;
bhnta—grc‘tmam—all the cosmic manifestations; imam—these; krtsnam—in
total; avas’am—automatically; prakrteh—of the force of nature; vas’c‘tt—under
obligation.

TRANSLATION

The Whole cosmic order is under Me. Under My Will it is automatically
manifested again and again, and under My Will it is annihilated at the end.

PURPORT

This material world is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This has already been explained several
times. At the creation, the material energy is let loose as the mahat-tattva, into
which the Lord as His first Purusa incarnation, Maha-Visnu, enters. He lies
within the Causal Ocean and breathes out innumerable universes, and into
each universe the Lord again enters as Garbhodakas’ayi Visnu. Each universe is
in that way created. He still further manifests Himself as Ksirodakas’ayi Visnu,
and that Visnu enters into everything—even into the minute atom. This fact
is explained here. He enters into everything.

Now, as far as the living entities are concerned, they are impregnated into
this material nature, and as a result of their past deeds they take different
positions. Thus the activities of this material world begin. The activities of the



different species of living beings are begun from the very moment of the
creation. It is not that all is evolved. The different species of life are created
immediately along with the universe. Men, animals, beasts, birds—everything
is simultaneously created, because whatever desires the living entities had at
the last annihilation are again manifested. It is clearly indicated here by the
word avas’am that the living entities have nothing to do with this process. The
state of being in their past life in the past creation is simply manifested again,
and all this is done simply by His will. This is the inconceivable potency of the
Supreme Personality of God. And after creating different species of life, He
has no connection with them. The creation takes place to accommodate the
inclinations of the various living entities, and so the Lord does not become
involved with it.

TEXT 9

3131111311131$11113113131331R3313131311
mammu

na ca mam tc‘Ini karmani
nibadhnanti dhananjaya
udasina—vad asinam
asaktam tesu karmasu

SYNONYMS

na—never; ca—also; mcim—Me; tc‘tni—all those; karmani—activities;
nibadhnanti—bind; dhananjaya—O conqueror of riches; udc‘tsina—vat—as
neutral; asinam—situated; asaktam—without attraction; tesu—for those;
karmasu—activities.

TRANSLATION

O Dhanaﬁjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached from all
these material activities, seated as though neutral.



PURPORT

One should not think, in this connection, that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead has no engagement. In His spiritual world He is always engaged. In
the Brabma-satiilzité (5.6) it is stated, dtmc‘trc‘tmasya tasydsti prakrtyc‘t na
samagamah: “He is always involved in His eternal, blissful, spiritual activities,
but He has nothing to do with these material activities.” Material activities are
being carried on by His different potencies. The Lord is always neutral in the
material activities of the created world. This neutrality is mentioned here with
the word udasina-Uat. Although He has control over every minute detail of
material activities, He is sitting as if neutral. The example can be given of a
high-court judge sitting on his bench. By his order so many things are
happening—someone is being hanged, someone is being put into jail, someone
is awarded a huge amount of wealth—but still he is neutral. He has nothing to
do with all that gain and loss. Similarly, the Lord is always neutral, although
He has His hand in every sphere of activity. In the Vedénta-sﬁtra (2.1.34) it is
stated, vaisamya-nairghrnye na: He is not situated in the dualities of this
material world. He is transcendental to these dualities. Nor is He attached to
the creation and annihilation of this material world. The living entities take
their different forms in the various species of life according to their past deeds,
and the Lord doesn’t interfere with them.

TEXT 10

WawmzagﬁmI
ﬁﬁﬁﬁaﬁﬁawﬁqﬁaﬁu 9o ||

mayadhyaksena prakrtih
snyate sa—carc‘tcaram
hetunc‘tnena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate



SYNONYMS

maya—by Me; adhyaksena—by superintendence; prakrtih—material nature;

snyate—manifests; sa—both; cara-acaram—the moving and the nonmoving;
hetunc‘t—for the reason; anena—this; kaunteya—O son of Kunti; jagat—the

cosmic manifestation; viparivartate—is working.

TRANSLATION

This material nature, Which is one of My energies, is working under My
direction, 0 son of Kunti, producing all moving and nonmoving beings. Under
its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.

PURPORT

It is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord, although aloof from all the
activities of the material world, remains the supreme director. The Supreme
Lord is the supreme will and the background of this material manifestation,
but the management is being conducted by material nature. Krsna also states
in Bhagavad-gitc‘t that of all of the living entities in different forms and species,
“I am the father.” The father gives seeds to the womb of the mother for the
child, and similarly the Supreme Lord by His mere glance injects all the living
entities into the womb of material nature, and they come out in their different
forms and species, according to their last desires and activities. All these living
entities, although born under the glance of the Supreme Lord, take their
different bodies according to their past deeds and desires. So the Lord is not
directly attached to this material creation. He simply glances over material
nature; material nature is thus activated, and everything is created
immediately. Because He glances over material nature, there is undoubtedly
activity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but He has nothing to do with the
manifestation of the material world directly. This example is given in the
smrti: when there is a fragrant ﬂower before someone, the fragrance is touched
by the smelling power of the person, yet the smelling and the flower are



detached from one another. There is a similar connection between the
material world and the Supreme Personality of Godhead; actually He has
nothing to do with this material world, but He creates by His glance and
ordains. In summary, material nature, without the superintendence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, cannot do anything. Yet the Supreme
Personality is detached from all material activities.

TEXT 11

3131311313331$13133131331P33131
33313331331133 331333133" 99 ||

avajc‘tnanti mam mﬁdhc‘t

manusim tanum c‘Is’ritam

param bhc‘wam ajc‘tnanto
mama bhﬁta—mahes’varam

SYNONYMS

avajc‘tnanti—deride; mam—Me; mﬁdhc‘th—foolish men; mc‘musim—in a human
form; tanum—a body; c‘ts’ritam—assuming; param—transcendental;
bhavam—nature; ajc‘tnantah—not knowing; mama—My; bhnta—of everything
that be; mahc‘t-is’vamm—the supreme proprietor.

TRANSLATION
Fools deride Me When I descend in the human form. They do not know My

transcendental nature as the Supreme Lord of all that be.

PURPORT

From the other explanations of the previous verses in this chapter, it is
clear that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing like a
human being, is not a common man. The Personality of Godhead, who



conducts the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the complete cosmic
manifestation, cannot be a human being. Yet there are many foolish men who
consider Krsna to be merely a powerful man and nothing more. Actually, He is
the original Supreme Personality, as is confirmed in the Bmhma-san’thitc‘t
(is’varah paramah krsnah); He is the Supreme Lord.

There are many is’vams, controllers, and one appears greater than another.
In the ordinary management of affairs in the material world, we find some
official or director, and above him there is a secretary, and above him a
minister, and above him a president. Each of them is a controller, but one is
controlled by another. In the Bmhma-san’thitc‘t it is said that Krsna is the
supreme controller; there are many controllers undoubtedly, both in the
material and spiritual world, but Krsna is the supreme controller (is’vamh
paramah krsnah). and His body is sac—cid—c‘tnanda, nonmaterial.

Material bodies cannot perform the wonderful acts described in previous
verses. His body is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge. Although He is not a
common man, the foolish deride Him and consider Him to be a man. His body
is called here mc‘musim because He is acting just like a man, a friend of
Arjuna’s, a politician involved in the Battle of Kuruksetra. In so many ways He
is acting just like an ordinary man, but actually His body is
sac—cid—c‘tnanda-vigmha [Bs. 5.1]—eternal bliss and knowledge absolute. This is
confirmed in the Vedic language also. Sac—cid—c‘tnanda—rﬁpc‘tya krsnc‘tya: “I offer
my obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, who is the
eternal blissful form of knowledge.” (Gopéla-tépam‘ Upam'saa 1.1) There are
other descriptions in the Vedic language also. Tam ekam govindam: “You are
Govinda, the pleasure of the senses and the cows.” Sac—cid—c‘tnanda—vigraham:
“And Your form is transcendental, full of knowledge, bliss and eternality.”
(Gopéla-tépam‘ Upam'saa 1.35)

Despite the transcendental qualities of Lord Krsna’s body, its full bliss and
knowledge, there are many so-called scholars and commentators of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t who deride Krsna as an ordinary man. The scholar may be born
an extraordinary man due to his previous good work, but this conception of Sri
Krsna is due to a poor fund of knowledge. Therefore he is called mﬁdha. for
only foolish persons consider Krsna to be an ordinary human being. The



foolish consider Krsna an ordinary human being because they do not know the
confidential activities of the Supreme Lord and His different energies. They
do not know that Krsna’s body is a symbol of complete knowledge and bliss,
that He is the proprietor of everything that be and that He can award
liberation to anyone. Because they do not know that Krsna has so many
transcendental qualifications, they deride Him.

Nor do they know that the appearance of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in this material world is a manifestation of His internal energy. He is
the master of the material energy. As has been explained in several places
(mama mayc‘t duratyayc‘t), He claims that the material energy, although very
powerful, is under His control, and whoever surrenders unto Him can get out
of the control of this material energy. If a soul surrendered to Krsna can get
out of the inﬂuence of material energy, then how can the Supreme Lord, who
conducts the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the whole cosmic
nature, have a material body like us? So this conception of Krsna is complete
foolishness. Foolish persons, however, cannot conceive that the Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, appearing just like an ordinary man, can be the controller of
all the atoms and of the gigantic manifestation of the universal form. The
biggest and the minutest are beyond their conception, so they cannot imagine
that a form like that of a human being can simultaneously control the infinite
and the minute. Actually although He is controlling the infinite and the
finite, He is apart from all this manifestation. It is clearly stated concerning
His yogam ais’vamm, His inconceivable transcendental energy, that He can
control the infinite and the finite simultaneously and that He can remain
aloof from them. Although the foolish cannot imagine how Krsna, who
appears just like a human being, can control the infinite and the finite, those
who are pure devotees accept this, for they know that Krsna is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore they completely surrender unto Him and
engage in Krsna consciousness, devotional service of the Lord.

There are many controversies between the impersonalists and the
personalists about the Lord’s appearance as a human being. But if we consult
Bhagavad-gitc‘t and Srimad—Bhagavatam, the authoritative texts for
understanding the science of Krsna, then we can understand that Krsna is the



Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is not an ordinary man, although He
appeared on this earth as an ordinary human. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, First
Canto, First Chapter, when the sages headed by Saunaka inquired about the
activities of Krsna, they said:

krtavc‘tn kila karmani

saha rc‘tmena kes’avah

ati—martyc‘tni bhagavc‘tn
gﬁdhah kapata—mc‘tnusah

“Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, along with
Balarama, played like a human being, and so masked He performed many
superhuman acts.” (Bbég. 1.1.20) The Lord’s appearance as a man bewilders the
foolish. No human being could perform the wonderful acts that Krsna
performed while He was present on this earth. When Krsna appeared before
His father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki, He appeared with four hands,
but after the prayers of the parents He transformed Himself into an ordinary
child. As stated in the Bbégavatam (10.3.46), babhnva prc‘tkrtah s’is’uh: He
became just like an ordinary child, an ordinary human being. Now, here again
it is indicated that the Lord’s appearance as an ordinary human being is one of
the features of His transcendental body. In the Eleventh Chapter of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t also it is stated that Arjuna prayed to see Krsna’s form of four
hands (tenaiva mpena catm—bhujena). After revealing this form, Krsna, when
petitioned by Arjuna, again assumed His original humanlike form (manusam
1121mm). These different features of the Supreme Lord are certainly not those
of an ordinary human being.

Some of those who deride Krsna and who are infected with the Mayavadi
philosophy quote the following verse from the grimad-Bbégavatam (3.29.21) to
prove that Krsna is just an ordinary man. Aham sarvesu bhntesu
bhﬁtatmcivasthitah sadc't: “The Supreme is present in every living entity.” We
should better take note of this particular verse from the Vaisnava cicc'tryas like
]iva Gosvami and Vis’vanatha Cakravarti Thakura instead of following the
interpretation of unauthorized persons who deride Krsna. ]iva Gosvami,
commenting on this verse, says that Krsna, in His plenary expansion as



Paramatma, is situated in the moving and the nonmoving entities as the
Supersoul, so any neophyte devotee who simply gives his attention to the
arcc‘t-mmti, the form of the Supreme Lord in the temple, and does not respect
other living entities is uselessly worshiping the form of the Lord in the temple.
There are three kinds of devotees of the Lord, and the neophyte is in the
lowest stage. The neophyte devotee gives more attention to the Deity in the
temple than to other devotees, so Vis’vanatha Cakravarti Thakura warns that
this sort of mentality should be corrected. A devotee should see that because
Krsna is present in everyone’s heart as Paramatma, every body is the
embodiment or the temple of the Supreme Lord; so as one offers respect to the
temple of the Lord, he should similarly properly respect each and every body in
which the Paramatma dwells. Everyone should therefore be given proper
respect and should not be neglected.

There are also many impersonalists who deride temple worship. They say
that since God is everywhere, why should one restrict himself to temple
worship? But if God is everywhere, is He not in the temple or in the Deity?
Although the personalist and the impersonalist will fight with one another
perpetually, a perfect devotee in Krsna consciousness knows that although
Krsna is the Supreme Personality, He is all-pervading, as confirmed in the
Bmhma-san’thitc‘t. Although His personal abode is Goloka Vrndavana and He is
always staying there, by His different manifestations of energy and by His
plenary expansion He is present everywhere in all parts of the material and
spiritual creation.

TEXT 12

313133313331333311311313313rzl
33313133333383133‘113131: || 93 ||

moghc‘ts’c‘t mogha—karmc‘tno
mogha—jnc‘tnc‘t vicetasah
rc‘tksasim 513mm caiva

prakrtim mohinim s’ritc‘th



SYNONYMS

mogha-c‘ts’c‘th—bafﬂed in their hopes; mogha—karmc‘tnah—bafﬂed in fruitive
activities; mogha—jnc‘tnc‘th—bafﬂed in knowledge; vicetasah—bewildered;
rc‘tksasim—demonic; asurim—atheistic; ca—and; eva—certainly;
prakrtim—nature; mohinim—bewildering; s’ritc‘th—taking shelter of.

TRANSLATION

Those Who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic Views.
In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities,
and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.

PURPORT

There are many devotees who assume themselves to be in Krsna
consciousness and devotional service but at heart do not accept the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, as the Absolute Truth. For them, the fruit of
devotional service—going back to Godhead—will never be tasted. Similarly,
those who are engaged in fruitive pious activities and who are ultimately
hoping to be liberated from this material entanglement will never be successful
either, because they deride the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In
other words, persons who mock Krsna are to be understood to be demonic or
atheistic. As described in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, such demonic
miscreants never surrender to Krsna. Therefore their mental speculations to
arrive at the Absolute Truth bring them to the false conclusion that the
ordinary living entity and Krsna are one and the same. With such a false
conviction, they think that the body of any human being is now simply
covered by material nature and that as soon as one is liberated from this
material body there is no difference between God and himself. This attempt to
become one with Krsna will be bafﬂed because of delusion. Such atheistic and
demoniac cultivation of spiritual knowledge is always futile. That is the
indication of this verse. For such persons, cultivation of the knowledge in the



Vedic literature, like the Vedanta-sntra and the Upanisads. is always bafﬂed.

It is a great offense, therefore, to consider Krsna, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, to be an ordinary man. Those who do so are certainly deluded
because they cannot understand the eternal form of Krsna. The
Brhad—visnu—smrti clearly states:

yo vetti bhautikam deham
krsnasya paramatmanah

sa sarvasmc‘td bahis—kc‘tryah

s’rauta—smc‘trta—vidhc‘tnatah
mukham tasyc‘walokyc‘tpi
sa—celam snc‘tnam c‘tcaret

“One who considers the body of Krsna to be material should be driven out
from all rituals and activities of the s’mti and the smrti. And if one by chance
sees his face, one should at once take bath in the Ganges to rid himself of
infection. People jeer at Krsna because they are envious of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Their destiny is certainly to take birth after birth in
the species of atheistic and demoniac life. Perpetually, their real knowledge
will remain under delusion, and gradually they will regress to the darkest
region of creation.”

TEXT 13

3313313333131333'1338131131311n
33333333331316113311833333II93II

mahdtmc‘tnas tn mam pc‘wtha
daivim prakrtim c‘ts’ritc‘th
bhajanty ananya—manaso
jnawa bhntadim avyayam

SYNONYMS

mahc‘I—C‘Itmc‘tnah—the great souls; tu—but; mam—unto Me; pc‘wtha—O son of



Prtha; daivim—divine; pmkrtim—nature; cis’ritc'th—having taken shelter of;
bhajanti—render service; ananya-manasah—without deviation of the mind;
jnc'ttvc't—knowing; bhﬁta—of creation; adim—the origin;
avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, those Who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the
protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service
because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and
inexhaustible.

PURPORT

In this verse the description of the mahc‘ttmc‘t is clearly given. The first sign
of the mahc‘ttmc‘t is that he is already situated in the divine nature. He is not
under the control of material nature. And how is this effected? That is
explained in the Seventh Chapter: one who surrenders unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, at once becomes freed from the control of
material nature. That is the qualification. One can become free from the
control of material nature as soon as he surrenders his soul to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is the preliminary formula. Being marginal
potency, as soon as the living entity is freed from the control of material
nature, he is put under the guidance of the spiritual nature. The guidance of
the spiritual nature is called daivi prakrti, divine nature. 80 when one is
promoted in that way—by surrendering to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead—one attains to the stage of great soul, mahc‘ttmc‘t.

The mahc‘ttmc‘t does not divert his attention to anything outside Krsna,
because he knows perfectly well that Krsna is the original Supreme Person, the
cause of all causes. There is no doubt about it. Such a mahc‘ttmc‘t, or great soul,
develops through association with other mahc‘ttmc‘ts, pure devotees. Pure
devotees are not even attracted by Krsna’s other features, such as the
four-armed Maha-Visnu. They are simply attracted by the two-armed form of
Krsna. They are not attracted to other features of Krsna, nor are they



concerned with any form of a demigod or of a human being. They meditate
only upon Krsna in Krsna consciousness. They are always engaged in the
unswerving service of the Lord in Krsna consciousness.

TEXT 14

313131ﬁ313r—3113133Ir—3131WH
33313133333118333333313131119811

satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas’ ca drdha-watc‘th
namasyantas’ ca mam bhaktyc‘t
nitya—yuktc‘t upc‘tsate

SYNONYMS

satatam—always; kirtayantah—chanting; mc‘tm—about Me; yatantah—fully
endeavoring; ca—also; drdha-watc'th—with determination;
namasyantah—offering obeisances; ca—and; mc‘tm—Me; bhaktyc‘t—in
devotion; nitya-yuktc'th—perpetually engaged; upasate—worship.

TRANSLATION

Always chanting My glories, endeavoring With great determination, bowing
down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me With devotion.

PURPORT

The mahc‘ttmc‘t cannot be manufactured by rubber-stamping an ordinary
man. His symptoms are described here: a mahc‘ttmc‘t is always engaged in
chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord Krsna, the Personality of Godhead.
He has no other business. He is always engaged in the glorification of the Lord.
In other words, he is not an impersonalist. When the question of glorification
is there, one has to glorify the Supreme Lord, praising His holy name, His



eternal form, His transcendental qualities and His uncommon pastimes. One
has to glorify all these things; therefore a mahc‘ttmc‘t is attached to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.

One who is attached to the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord, the
brahmajyoti, is not described as mahc‘ttmc‘t in the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. He is described
in a different way in the next verse. The mahc‘ttmc‘t is always engaged in
different activities of devotional service, as described in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, hearing and chanting about Visnu, not a demigod or
human being. That is devotion: s’ravanam kirtanam visnoh and smaranam,
remembering Him. Such a mahc‘ttmc‘t has firm determination to achieve at the
ultimate end the association of the Supreme Lord in any one of the five
transcendental Tasas. To achieve that success, he engages all
activities—mental, bodily and vocal, everything—in the service of the
Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna. That is called full Krsna consciousness.

In devotional service there are certain activities which are called
determined, such as fasting on certain days, like the eleventh day of the moon,
Ekadas’i, and on the appearance day of the Lord. All these rules and
regulations are offered by the great cicc'wyas for those who are actually
interested in getting admission into the association of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in the transcendental world. The mahc‘ttmc‘ts, great souls, strictly
observe all these rules and regulations, and therefore they are sure to achieve
the desired result.

As described in the second verse of this chapter, not only is this devotional
service easy, but it can be performed in a happy mood. One does not need to
undergo any severe penance and austerity. He can live this life in devotional
service, guided by an expert spiritual master, and in any position, either as a
householder or a sannyc'tsi or a brahmacc‘tri; in any position and anywhere in
the world, he can perform this devotional service to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and thus become actually mahc‘ttmc‘t, a great soul.

TEXT 15

3113331331633333131‘13133131311



3313313 333931 313311 1313131333311 99 ||

jnc‘Ina—yajnena cc‘tpy anye
yajanto mam upc‘tsate
ekatvena prthaktvena

bahudhc‘t vis’vato—mukham

SYNONYMS

jnc‘tna—yajnena—by cultivation of knowledge; ca—also; api—certainly;
anye—others; yajantah—sacrificing; mc‘tm—Me; upasate—worship;
ekatvena—in oneness; prthaktvena—in duality; bahudhc‘t—in diversity;
vis’vatah—mukham—and in the universal form.

TRANSLATION

Others, Who engage in sacrifice by the cultivation of knowledge, worship the
Supreme Lord as the one Without a second, as diverse in many, and in the
universal form.

PURPORT

This verse is the summary of the previous verses. The Lord tells Arjuna that
those who are purely in Krsna consciousness and do not know anything other
than Krsna are called mahc‘ttmc‘t; yet there are other persons who are not
exactly in the position of mahc‘ttmc‘t but who worship Krsna also, in different
ways. Some of them have already been described as the distressed, the
financially destitute, the inquisitive, and those who are engaged in the
cultivation of knowledge. But there are others who are still lower, and these
are divided into three: (1) he who worships himself as one with the Supreme
Lord, (2) he who concocts some form of the Supreme Lord and worships that,
and (3) he who accepts the universal form, the Uis’varﬁpa of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and worships that. Out of the above three, the lowest,
those who worship themselves as the Supreme Lord, thinking themselves to be



monists, are most predominant. Such people think themselves to be the
Supreme Lord, and in this mentality they worship themselves. This is also a
type of God worship, for they can understand that they are not the material
body but are actually spiritual soul; at least, such a sense is prominent.
Generally the impersonalists worship the Supreme Lord in this way. The
second class includes the worshipers of the demigods, those who by
imagination consider any form to be the form of the Supreme Lord. And the
third class includes those who cannot conceive of anything beyond the
manifestation of this material universe. They consider the universe to be the
supreme organism or entity and worship that. The universe is also a form of

the Lord.

3311533333333333133 331311 95 ||

aham kratm aham yajnah
svadhc‘tham aham ausadham
mantro ’ham aham evc‘tjyam

aham agnir aham hutam

SYNONYMS

aham—I; kratuh—Vedic ritual; aham—I; yajnah—smrti sacrifice;
svadhc‘t—oblation; aham—I; aham—I; ausadham—healing herb;
mantrah—transcendental chant; aham—I; aham—I; eva—certainly;
djyam—melted butter; aham—I; agnih—fire; aham—I; hutam—offering.

TRANSLATION

But it is I Who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the ancestors,
the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butter and the fire and the
offering.



PURPORT

The Vedic sacrifice known as jyotistoma is also Krsna, and He is also the
mahc‘t-yajna mentioned in the smrti. The oblations offered to the Pitrloka or
the sacrifice performed to please the Pitrloka, considered as a kind of drug in
the form of clarified butter, is also Krsna. The mantras chanted in this
connection are also Krsna. And many other commodities made with milk
products for offering in the sacrifices are also Krsna. The fire is also Krsna
because fire is one of the five material elements and is therefore claimed as the
separated energy of Krsna. In other words, the Vedic sacrifices recommended
in the karma-kc‘tnda division of the Vedas are in total also Krsna. Or, in other
words, those who are engaged in rendering devotional service unto Krsna are

to be understood to have performed all the sacrifices recommended in the
Vedas.

TEXT 17

f33113333313131131311313nf33113321
31313133133313w31133$3r31u919u

pitc‘tham asya jagato
mata dhata pitdmahah
vedyam pavitram omkc‘tra
1k sama yajm eva ca

SYNONYMS

pitc‘t—father; aham—I; asya—of this; jagatah—universe; mata—mother;
dhc‘ttc‘t—supporter; pitc‘tmahah—grandfather; vedyam—what is to be known;
pavitram—that which purifies; om—kc‘tra—the syllable om; Tk—the Rg Veda;
sc‘tma—the Santa Veda; yajuh—the Yajm Veda; eva—certainly; ca—and.



TRANSLATION

I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support and the grandsire. I
am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable om. I am also the Rg,
the Sama and the Yajur Vedas.

PURPORT

The entire cosmic manifestations, moving and nonmoving, are manifested
by different activities of Krsna’s energy. In the material existence we create
different relationships with different living entities who are nothing but
Krsna’s marginal energy; under the creation of pmkrti some of them appear as
our father, mother, grandfather, creator, etc., but actually they are parts and
parcels of Krsna. As such, these living entities who appear to be our father,
mother, etc., are nothing but Krsna. In this verse the word dhc‘ttc‘t means
“creator.” Not only are our father and mother parts and parcels of Krsna, but
the creator, grandmother and grandfather, etc., are also Krsna. Actually any
living entity, being part and parcel of Krsna, is Krsna. All the Vedas, therefore,
aim only toward Krsna. Whatever we want to know through the Vedas is but a
progressive step toward understanding Krsna. That subject matter which helps
us purify our constitutional position is especially Krsna. Similarly, the living
entity who is inquisitive to understand all Vedic principles is also part and
parcel of Krsna and as such is also Krsna. In all the Vedic mantras the word
0111, called pranava, is a transcendental sound vibration and is also Krsna. And
because in all the hymns of the four Vedas—Sc‘tma, Yajm, Rg and
Atharva—the pranava, or omkc‘tm, is very prominent, it is understood to be
Krsna.

TEXT 18

31131331133:311&1‘1133I131:313°1333LI
3331: 3333:3113133133‘13133333" 9= 11



gatir bhartc‘t prabhuh sc‘tksi
nivc‘tsah s’aranam suhrt
prabhavah pralayah sthc‘tnam
nidhc‘tnam bijam avyayam

SYNONYMS

gatih—goal; bhartc‘t—sustainer; prabhuh—Lord; sc‘tksi—witness;
nivc‘tsah—abode; s’aranam—refuge; su-hTt—most intimate friend;
prabhavah—creation; pralayah—dissolution; sthdnam—ground;
nidhc‘tnam—resting place; bijam—seed; avyayam—imperishable.

TRANSLATION

I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the Witness, the abode, the refuge,
and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the annihilation, the basis of
everything, the resting place and the eternal seed.

PURPORT

Gati means the destination where we want to go. But the ultimate goal is
Krsna, although people do not know it. One who does not know Krsna is
misled, and his so-called progressive march is either partial or hallucinatory.
There are many who make as their destination different demigods, and by rigid
performance of the strict respective methods they reach different planets
known as Candraloka, Sfiryaloka, Indraloka, Maharloka, etc. But all such lokas,
or planets, being creations of Krsna, are simultaneously Krsna and not Krsna.
Such planets, being manifestations of Krsna’s energy, are also Krsna, but
actually they serve only as a step forward for realization of Krsna. To approach
the different energies of Krsna is to approach Krsna indirectly. One should
directly approach Krsna, for that will save time and energy. For example, if
there is a possibility of going to the top of a building by the help of an elevator,
why should one go by the staircase, step by step? Everything is resting on
Krsna’s energy; therefore without Krsna’s shelter nothing can exist. Krsna is



the supreme ruler because everything belongs to Him and everything exists on
His energy. Krsna, being situated in everyone’s heart, is the supreme witness.
The residences, countries or planets on which we live are also Krsna. Krsna is
the ultimate goal of shelter, and therefore one should take shelter of Krsna
either for protection or for annihilation of his distress. And whenever we have
to take protection, we should know that our protection must be a living force.
Krsna is the supreme living entity. And since Krsna is the source of our
generation, or the supreme father, no one can be a better friend than Krsna,
nor can anyone be a better well-wisher. Krsna is the original source of creation
and the ultimate rest after annihilation. Krsna is therefore the eternal cause of
all causes.

TEXT 19

WHETWHI
31131313331333'33133—3‘3119311

tapamy aham aham varsam
nigrhncimy utsrjc‘tmi ca
amrtam caiva mrtyus’ ca
sad asac cc‘tham arjuna

SYNONYMS

tapami—give heat; aham—I; aham—I; varsam—rain; nigrhnc‘tmi—withhold;
utsrjc‘tmi—send forth; ca—and; amrtam—immortality; ca—and;
eva—certainly; mrtyuh—death; ca—and; sat—spirit; asat—matter; ca—and;
aham—I; arjuna—O Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, I give heat, and I withhold and send forth the rain. I am
immortality, and I am also death personified. Both spirit and matter are in Me.



PURPORT

Krsna, by His different energies, diffuses heat and light through the agency
of electricity and the sun. During summer season it is Krsna who checks rain
from falling from the sky, and then during the rainy season He gives unceasing
torrents of rain. The energy which sustains us by prolonging the duration of
our life is Krsna, and Krsna meets us at the end as death. By analyzing all these
different energies of Krsna, one can ascertain that for Krsna there is no
distinction between matter and spirit, or, in other words, He is both matter
and spirit. In the advanced stage of Krsna consciousness, one therefore makes
no such distinctions. He sees only Krsna in everything.

Since Krsna is both matter and spirit, the gigantic universal form
comprising all material manifestations is also Krsna, and His pastimes in
Vrndavana as two-handed Syamasundara, playing on a flute, are those of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 20
381313131331:3glmm
33331333833331

33033131333333?—
3313383311331313313133311 30 II

trai—vidyc‘t mam soma—pc‘th pﬁta—pc‘tpc‘t
yajnair istvc‘t svar—gatim prc‘trthayante
te punyam c‘tsc‘tdya smendra—lokam
as’nanti divyc‘tn divi deva—bhogc‘tn

SYNONYMS

trai—vidyc‘th—the knowers of the three Vedas; mam—Me; soma—pdh—drinkers
of soma juice; pnta—purified; papah—of sins; yajnaih—with sacrifices;



istvc‘t—worshiping; svah-gatim—passage to heaven; prc‘wthayante—pray for;
te—they; punyam—pious; c‘tsc‘tdya—attaining; sura-indra—of Indra;
lokam—the world; as’nanti—enjoy; divyc‘In—celestial; divi—in heaven;
deva—bhogc‘tn—the pleasures of the gods.

TRANSLATION

Those Who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the heavenly
planets, worship Me indirectly. Purified of sinful reactions, they take birth on
the pious, heavenly planet of Indra, Where they enjoy godly delights.

PURPORT

The word trai-vidyc‘th refers to the three Vedas—Sc‘tma, Yajm and Rg. A
brc‘thmana who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri—vedi. Anyone who is
very much attached to knowledge derived from these three Vedas is respected
in society. Unfortunately, there are many great scholars of the Vedas who do
not know the ultimate purport of studying them. Therefore Krsna herein
declares Himself to be the ultimate goal for the tTi-Uedis. Actual tri-Uedis take
shelter under the lotus feet of Krsna and engage in pure devotional service to
satisfy the Lord. Devotional service begins with the chanting of the Hare
Krsna mantra and side by side trying to understand Krsna in truth.
Unfortunately those who are simply official students of the Vedas become
more interested in offering sacrifices to the different demigods like Indra and
Candra. By such endeavor, the worshipers of different demigods are certainly
purified of the contamination of the lower qualities of nature and are thereby
elevated to the higher planetary systems or heavenly planets known as
Maharloka, Janoloka, Tapoloka, etc. Once situated on those higher planetary
systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds of thousands of times better than
on this planet.

TEXT 21
33113383333833



33303331333338“
33133133333331

313113131m3m3133331113911

te tam bhuktvc‘t svarga—lokam vis’c‘tlam
ksine punye martya-lokam vis’anti
evam trayi—dharmam anuprapannc‘t
gatdgatam kama—kc‘tmc‘t labhante

SYNONYMS

te—they; tam—that; bhuktvc‘t—enjoying; svarga—lokam—heaven;
vis’c‘tlam—vast; ksine—being exhausted; punye—the results of their pious
activities; martya-lokam—to the mortal earth; vis’anti—fall down; evam—thus;
trayi—of the three Vedas; dharmam—doctrines; anuprapannc‘th—following;
gata—c‘tgatam—death and birth; kama—kdmc‘th—desiring sense enjoyments;
labhante—attain.

TRANSLATION

When they have thus enjoyed vast heavenly sense pleasure and the results of
their pious activities are exhausted, they return to this mortal planet again.
Thus those Who seek sense enjoyment by adhering to the principles of the three
Vedas achieve only repeated birth and death.

PURPORT

One who is promoted to the higher planetary systems enjoys a longer
duration of life and better facilities for sense enjoyment, yet one is not allowed
to stay there forever. One is again sent back to this earth upon finishing the
resultant fruits of pious activities. He who has not attained perfection of
knowledge, as indicated in the Vedanta-sntra (janmc‘tdy asya yatah), or, in other
words, he who fails to understand Krsna, the cause of all causes, becomes
bafﬂed about achieving the ultimate goal of life and is thus subjected to the



routine of being promoted to the higher planets and then again coming down,
as if situated on a Ferris wheel which sometimes goes up and sometimes comes
down. The purport is that instead of being elevated to the spiritual world, from
which there is no longer any possibility of coming down, one simply revolves
in the cycle of birth and death on higher and lower planetary systems. One
should better take to the spiritual world to enjoy an eternal life full of bliss and
knowledge and never return to this miserable material existence.

TEXT 22

Wmmﬁmzqﬁmﬁ
aqiﬁwﬁvﬁlﬁiﬁmﬁﬁmuqqu

ananyc‘is’ cintayanto mam
ye janc‘ih paryupc‘isate
tesam nityabhiyuktandm
yoga—ksemam vahc‘imy aham

SYNONYMS

cmanyc‘ih—having no other object; cintayantah—concentrating; mdm—on Me;
ye—those who; janc‘ih—persons; paryupc‘isate—properly worship; tesc‘tm—of
them; nitya—always; abhiyuktc‘mam—fixed in devotion; yoga—requirements;
ksemam—proteetion; vahc‘tmi—carry; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

But those who always worship Me with exclusive devotion, meditating on
My transcendental form—to them I carry what they lack, and I preserve what
they have.

PURPORT

One who is unable to live for a moment without Krsna consciousness

Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust lnt'l. All Rights Reserved.

cannot but think of Krsna twenty-four hours a day, being engaged in
devotional serVice by hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers,
worshiping, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, rendering other services,
cultivating friendship and surrendering fully to the Lord. Such activities are
all auspicious and full of spiritual potencies, which make the devotee perfect in
self-realization, so that his only desire is to achieve the association of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a devotee undoubtedly approaches the
Lord without difficulty. This is called yoga. By the mercy of the Lord, such a
devotee never comes back to this material condition of life. Ksema refers to the
merciful protection of the Lord. The Lord helps the devotee to achieve Krsna
consciousness by yoga, and when he becomes fully Krsna conscious the Lord
protects him from falling down to a miserable conditioned life.

TEXT 23

ﬁsmmmzl
*ﬁﬁlﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁmll 23 ||

ye ’py anya-devata—bhakta
yajcmte s’raddhayc‘mvitah

te ’pi mam eva kaunteya

yajcmty avidhi-pmvakam

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; api—also; anya—of other; devatc‘i—gods; bhaktah—devotees;
yajame—worship; s’raddhayc‘i anvitc‘ih—with faith; te—they; api—also;
mam—Me; eva—only; kaunteya—O son of Kunti; yajcmti—they worship;
avidhi—pmvakam—in a wrong way.

TRANSLATION

Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith
actually worship only Me, 0 son of Kunti, but they do so in a wrong way.

Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust lnt'l. All Rights Reserved.

PURPORT

“Persons who are engaged in the worship of demigods are not very
intelligent, although such worship is offered to Me indirectly,” Krsna says. For
example, when a man pours water on the leaves and branches of a tree without
pouring water on the root, he does so without sufficient knowledge or without
observing regulative principles. Similarly, the process of rendering serVice to
different parts of the body is to supply food to the stomach. The demigods are,
so to speak, different officers and directors in the government of the Supreme
Lord. One has to follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers
or directors. Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the Supreme Lord
only. That will automatically satisfy the different officers and directors of the
Lord. The officers and directors are engaged as representatives of the
government, and to offer some bribe to the officers and directors is illegal. This
is stated here as avidhi-pmvakam. In other words, Krsna does not approve the
unnecessary worship of the demigods.

TEXT 24

aﬁﬁaﬁaamiﬁmamﬁaal
HgWﬁﬁﬁﬁqar—aﬁwﬁwﬁuqau

aham hi sarva—yajﬁanam

bhoktc‘i ca prabhur eva ca
71a tu mam abhijc‘manti
tatwendtas’ cyavcmti te

SYNONYMS

aham—I; hi—surely; sarUa—of all; yajﬁandm—sacrifices; bhoktc‘i—the enjoyer;
ca—and; prabhuh—the Lord; eva—also; ca—and; na—not; tu—but;
mam—Me; abhijc‘manti—they know; tatwena—in reality; atah—therefore;
cyavcmti—fall down; te—they.

Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust lnt'l. All Rights Reserved.

TRANSLATION

I am the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices. Therefore, those who do
not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.

PURPORT

Here it is clearly stated that there are many types of yajﬁa performances
recommended in the Vedic literatures, but actually all of them are meant for
satisfying the Supreme Lord. Yajﬁa means Visnu. In the Third Chapter of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t it is clearly stated that one should only work for satisfying
Yajﬁa, or Visnu. The perfectional form of human civilization, known as
vamc‘is’rama—dharma, is specifically meant for satisfying Visnu. Therefore,
Krsna says in this verse, “I am the enjoyer of all sacrifices because I am the
supreme master.” Less intelligent persons, however, without knowing this fact,
worship demigods for temporary benefit. Therefore they fall down to material
existence and do not achieve the desired goal of life. If, however, anyone has
any material desire to be fulfilled, he had better pray for it to the Supreme
Lord (although that is not pure devotion), and he will thus achieve the desired
result.

TEXT 25

WWWWM
wmwmwmﬁmuaau

yc‘mti deva-watc‘i devc‘m

pitfn yc‘mti pitT—watc‘ih

bhﬁtc‘mi yc‘mti bhﬁtejyc‘i
yc‘mti mad—yc‘ijmo ’pi mam

SYNONYMS



yc‘mti—go; deva—watah—worshipers of demigods; devc‘m—to the demigods;
pitTn—to the ancestors; yc‘mti—go; pitT-Umtah—worshipers of ancestors;
bhﬁtc'mi—to the ghosts and spirits; yc‘mti—go; bhﬁta-ijyah—worshipers of
ghosts and spirits; yc‘mti—go; mat—My; yc‘tjinah—devotees; api—but;
mam—unto Me.

TRANSLATION

Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those
who worship the ancestors go to the ancestors; those who worship ghosts and
spirits will take birth among such beings; and those who worship Me will live

with Me.

PURPORT

If one has any desire to go to the moon, the sun or any other planet, one
can attain the desired destination by following specific Vedic principles
recommended for that purpose, such as the process technically known as
dars’a-paumamasi These are vividly described in the fruitive activities portion
of the Vedas, which recommends a specific worship of demigods situated on
different heavenly planets. Similarly, one can attain the Pita planets by
performing a specific yajﬁa. Similarly, one can go to many ghostly planets and
become a Yaksa, Raksa or Pis’aca. Pis’aca worship is called “black arts” or “black
magic.” There are many men who practice this black art, and they think that it
is spiritualism, but such activities are completely materialistic. Similarly, a pure
devotee, who worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead only, achieves the
planets of Vaikuntha and Krsnaloka without a doubt. It is very easy to
understand through this important verse that if by simply worshiping the
demigods one can achieve the heavenly planets, or by worshiping the Pitas
achieve the Pita planets, or by practicing the black arts achieve the ghostly
planets, why can the pure devotee not achieve the planet of Krsna or Visnu?
Unfortunately many people have no information of these sublime planets
where Krsna and Visnu live, and because they do not know of them they fall
down. Even the impersonalists fall down from the brahmajyoti. The Krsna



consciousness movement is therefore distributing sublime information to the
entire human society to the effect that by simply chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra one can become perfect in this life and go back home, back to

Godhead.

TEXT 26
wwmawamml
Wwwﬁmzmau

patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktyc‘i prayacchati
tad aham bhakty—upahrtam
as’nami prayatc‘itmanah

SYNONYMS

patram—a leaf; puspam—a flower; phalam—a fruit; toyam—water;
yah—whoever; me—unto Me; bhaktyc‘i—with devotion; prayacchati—offers;
tat—that; aham—I; bhakti—upahrtam—offered in devotion; as’nami—accept;
prayata-atmanah—from one in pure consciousness.

TRANSLATION
If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, I will

accept it.

PURPORT

For the intelligent person, it is essential to be in Krsna consciousness,
engaged in the transcendental loving serVice of the Lord, in order to achieve a
permanent, blissful abode for eternal happiness. The process of achieving such
a marvelous result is very easy and can be attempted even by the poorest of the
poor, without any kind of qualification. The only qualification required in this



connection is to be a pure devotee of the Lord. It does not matter what one is
or where one is situated. The process is so easy that even a leaf or a little water
or fruit can be offered to the Supreme Lord in genuine love and the Lord will
be pleased to accept it. No one, therefore, can be barred from Krsna
consciousness, because it is so easy and universal. Who is such a fool that he
does not want to be Krsna conscious by this simple method and thus attain the
highest perfectional life of eternity, bliss and knowledge? Krsna wants only
loving serVice and nothing more. Krsna accepts even a little flower from His
pure devotee. He does not want any kind of offering from a nondevotee. He is
not in need of anything from anyone, because He is self-sufficient, and yet He
accepts the offering of His devotee in an exchange of love and affection. To
develop Krsna consciousness is the highest perfection of life. Bhakti is
mentioned twice in this verse in order to declare more emphatically that
bhakti, or devotional service, is the only means to approach Krsna. No other
condition, such as becoming a brc‘thmana. a learned scholar, a very rich man or
a great philosopher, can induce Krsna to accept some offering. Without the
basic principle of bhakti, nothing can induce the Lord to agree to accept
anything from anyone. Bhakti is never causal. The process is eternal. It is
direct action in serVice to the absolute whole.

Here Lord Krsna, having established that He is the only enjoyer, the
primeval Lord and the real object of all sacrificial offerings, reveals what types
of sacrifices He desires to be offered. If one wishes to engage in devotional
serVice to the Supreme in order to be purified and to reach the goal of
life—the transcendental loving serVice of God—then one should find out
what the Lord desires of him. One who loves Krsna will give Him whatever He
wants, and he avoids offering anything which is undesirable or unasked. Thus
meat, fish and eggs should not be offered to Krsna. If He desired such things as
offerings, He would have said so. Instead He clearly requests that a leaf, fruit,
flowers and water be given to Him, and He says of this offering, “I will accept
it.” Therefore, we should understand that He will not accept meat, fish and
eggs. Vegetables, grains, fruits, milk and water are the proper foods for human
beings and are prescribed by Lord Krsna Himself. Whatever else we eat cannot
be offered to Him, since He will not accept it. Thus we cannot be acting on the



level of loving devotion if we offer such foods.

In the Third Chapter, verse thirteen, Sri Krsna explains that only the
remains of sacrifice are purified and fit for consumption by those who are
seeking advancement in life and release from the clutches of the material
entanglement. Those who do not make an offering of their food, He says in the
same verse, are eating only sin. In other words, their every mouthful is simply
deepening their involvement in the complexities of material nature. But
preparing nice, simple vegetable dishes, offering them before the picture or
Deity of Lord Krsna and bowing down and praying for Him to accept such a
humble offering enables one to advance steadily in life, to purify the body, and
to create fine brain tissues which will lead to clear thinking. Above all, the
offering should be made with an attitude of love. Krsna has no need of food,
since He already possesses everything that be, yet He will accept the offering
of one who desires to please Him in that way. The important element, in
preparation, in serving and in offering, is to act with love for Krsna.

The impersonalist philosophers, who wish to maintain that the Absolute
Truth is without senses, cannot comprehend this verse of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. To
them, it is either a metaphor or proof of the mundane character of Krsna, the
speaker of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. But, in actuality, Krsna, the Supreme Godhead,
has senses, and it is stated that His senses are interchangeable; in other words,
one sense can perform the function of any other. This is what it means to say
that Krsna is absolute. Lacking senses, He could hardly be considered full in all
opulences. In the Seventh Chapter, Krsna has explained that He impregnates
the living entities into material nature. This is done by His looking upon
material nature. And so in this instance, Krsna’s hearing the devotee’s words
of love in offering foodstuffs is wholly identical with His eating and actually
tasting. This point should be emphasized: because of His absolute position, His
hearing is wholly identical with His eating and tasting. Only the devotee, who
accepts Krsna as He describes Himself, without interpretation, can understand
that the Supreme Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it.

TEXT 27



Wwwmﬁwﬁml
Wﬁﬁwwnﬁq‘muwu

yat karosi yad as’nasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kmusva mad—arpanam

SYNONYMS

yat—whatever; karosi—you do; yat—whatever; as’nasi—you eat;
yat—whatever; juhosi—you offer; dadc‘tsi—you give away; yat—whatever;
yat—whatever; tapasyasi—austerities you perform; kaunteya—O son of Kunti;
tat—that; kurusva—do; mat—unto Me; arpanam—as an offering.

TRANSLATION

Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or give away, and
whatever austerities you perform—do that, 0 son of Kunti, as an offering to

Me.

PURPORT

Thus, it is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he will
not forget Krsna in any circumstance. Everyone has to work for maintenance
of his body and soul together, and Krsna recommends herein that one should
work for Him. Everyone has to eat something to live; therefore he should
accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna. Any civilized man has to
perform some religious ritualistic ceremonies; therefore Krsna recommends,
“Do it for Me,” and this is called arcana. Everyone has a tendency to give
something in charity; Krsna says, “Give it to Me,” and this means that all
surplus money accumulated should be utilized in furthering the Krsna
consciousness movement. Nowadays people are very much inclined to the
meditational process, which is not practical in this age, but if anyone practices



meditating on Krsna twenty-four hours a day by chanting the Hare Krsna
mantra round his beads, he is surely the greatest meditator and the greatest
yogi. as substantiated by the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘i.

TEXT 28

mWﬁaﬁWﬁzl
mwmum

s’ubhc‘is’ubha—phalair evam
moksyase karma-bandhanaih
sannyasa—yoga—yuktatma
Uimukto mam upaisyasi

SYNONYMS

s’ubha—from auspicious; as’ubha—and inauspicious; phalaih—results;
evam—thus; moksyase—you will become free; karma—of work;
bandhanaih—from the bondage; scmnyc‘isa—of renunciation; yoga—the yoga;
yukta—c‘itmc‘i—having the mind firmly set on; vimuktah—liberated; mam—to
Me; upaisyasi—you will attain.

TRANSLATION

In this way you will be freed from bondage to work and its auspicious and
inauspicious results. With your mind fixed on Me in this principle of
renunciation, you will be liberated and come to Me.

PURPORT

One who acts in Krsna consciousness under superior direction is called
yukta. The technical term is yukta—Uairagya. This is further explained by Rupa
Gosvami as follows:

anasaktasya visayc‘m



yathc‘wham upayuﬁjatah
nirbandhah krsna—sambandhe

yuktam vairc‘igyam ucyate
(Bbakti—rasémrta-smdbu 2.255)

Rupa Gosvami says that as long as we are in this material world we have to
act; we cannot cease acting. Therefore if actions are performed and the fruits
are given to Krsna, then that is called yukta-Uaimgya. Actually situated in
renunciation, such activities clear the mirror of the mind, and as the actor
gradually makes progress in spiritual realization he becomes completely
surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore at the end he
becomes liberated, and this liberation is also specified. By this liberation he
does not become one with the brahmajyoti, but rather enters into the planet of
the Supreme Lord. It is clearly mentioned here: mam upaisyasi, “he comes to
Me,” back home, back to Godhead. There are five different stages of liberation,
and here it is specified that the devotee who has always lived his lifetime here
under the direction of the Supreme Lord, as stated, has evolved to the point
where he can, after quitting this body, go back to Godhead and engage directly
in the association of the Supreme Lord.

Anyone who has no interest but to dedicate his life to the serVice of the
Lord is actually a sannyc'isi. Such a person always thinks of himself as an eternal
servant, dependent on the supreme will of the Lord. As such, whatever he
does, he does it for the benefit of the Lord. Whatever action he performs, he
performs it as serVice to the Lord. He does not give serious attention to the
fruitive activities or prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas. For ordinary
persons it is obligatory to execute the prescribed duties mentioned in the
Vedas, but although a pure devotee who is completely engaged in the serVice of
the Lord may sometimes appear to go against the prescribed Vedic duties,
actually it is not so.

It is said, therefore, by Vaisnava authorities that even the most intelligent
person cannot understand the plans and activities of a pure devotee. The exact
words are tc‘mra vc‘tkya, kriyc‘i, mudra Uijﬁeha mi bujhaya (Caitanya-caritﬁmrta,
Madhya 23.39). A person who is thus always engaged in the serVice of the Lord
or is always thinking and planning how to serve the Lord is to be considered



completely liberated at present, and in the future his going back home, back to
Godhead, is guaranteed. He is above all materialistic criticism, just as Krsna is
above all criticism.

TEXT 29

anisz‘aahﬁgﬁﬁasfﬁﬂiﬁﬁfhwn
ﬁwﬁqgwmqﬁrﬁﬁgmuqsu

samo ’ham sarva—bhﬁtesu
71a me dvesyo ’sti 71a priyah
ye bhajanti tu mam bhaktyc‘i
mayi te tesu cc‘tpy aham

SYNONYMS

samah—equally disposed; aham—I; sarva—bhﬁtesu—to all living entities;
na—no one; me—to Me; dvesyah—hateful; asti—is; na—nor; priyah—dear;
ye—those who; bhajanti—render transcendental service; tu—but; mam—unto
Me; bhaktyc'i—in devotion; mayi—are in Me; te—such persons; tesu—in them;
ca—also; api—certainly; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever
renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend
to him.

PURPORT

One may question here that if Krsna is equal to everyone and no one is His
special friend, then why does He take a special interest in the devotees who are
always engaged in His transcendental service? But this is not discrimination; it
is natural. Any man in this material world may be very charitably disposed, yet



he has a special interest in his own children. The Lord claims that every living
entity—in whatever form—is His son, and so He provides everyone with a
generous supply of the necessities of life. He is just like a cloud which pours
rain all over, regardless of whether it falls on rock or land or water. But for His
devotees, He gives specific attention. Such devotees are mentioned here: they
are always in Krsna consciousness, and therefore they are always
transcendentally situated in Krsna. The very phrase “Krsna consciousness”
suggests that those who are in such consciousness are living transcendentalists,
situated in Him. The Lord says here distinctly, mayi te: “They are in Me.”
Naturally, as a result, the Lord is also in them. This is reciprocal. This also
explains the words ye yathc‘i mam prapadyante rams tathaiva bhajamy aham:
“Whoever surrenders unto Me, proportionately I take care of him.” This
transcendental reciprocation exists because both the Lord and the devotee are
conscious. When a diamond is set in a golden ring, it looks very nice. The gold
is glorified, and at the same time the diamond is glorified. The Lord and the
living entity eternally glitter, and when a living entity becomes inclined to the
serVice of the Supreme Lord he looks like gold. The Lord is a diamond, and so
this combination is very nice. Living entities in a pure state are called
devotees. The Supreme Lord becomes the devotee of His devotees. If a
reciprocal relationship is not present between the devotee and the Lord, then
there is no personalist philosophy. In the impersonal philosophy there is no
reciprocation between the Supreme and the living entity, but in the
personalist philosophy there is.

The example is often given that the Lord is like a desire tree, and whatever
one wants from this desire tree, the Lord supplies. But here the explanation is
more complete. The Lord is here stated to be partial to the devotees. This is
the manifestation of the Lord’s special mercy to the devotees. The Lord’s
reciprocation should not be considered to be under the law of karma. It
belongs to the transcendental situation in which the Lord and His devotees
function. Devotional serVice to the Lord is not an activity of this material
world; it is part of the spiritual world, where eternity, bliss and knowledge
predominate.



TEXT 30

WWWWI
WHW:WW%H:II30II

api cet su—durc‘icc‘wo
bhajate mam ammya—bhc‘ik
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah

SYNONYMS

api—even; cet—if; su—durc‘icc‘wah—one committing the most abominable
actions; bhajate—is engaged in devotional service; mam—unto Me;
ananya—bhak—without deviation; sadhuh—a saint; eva—certainly; sah—he;
mantavyah—is to be considered; samyak—completely; vyavasitah—situated in
determination; hi—certainly; sah—he.

TRANSLATION

Even if one commits the most abominable action, if he is engaged in
devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated
in his determination.

PURPORT

The word su-dmc‘tcc‘wah used in this verse is very significant, and we should
understand it properly. When a living entity is conditioned, he has two kinds
of activities: one is conditional, and the other is constitutional. As for
protecting the body or abiding by the rules of society and state, certainly there
are different activities, even for the devotees, in connection with the
conditional life, and such activities are called conditional. Besides these, the
living entity who is fully conscious of his spiritual nature and is engaged in
Krsna consciousness, or the devotional serVice of the Lord, has activities which



are called transcendental. Such activities are performed in his constitutional
position, and they are technically called devotional serVice. Now, in the
conditioned state, sometimes devotional serVice and the conditional serVice in
relation to the body will parallel one another. But then again, sometimes these
activities become opposed to one another. As far as possible, a devotee is very
cautious so that he does not do anything that could disrupt his wholesome
condition. He knows that perfection in his activities depends on his
progressive realization of Krsna consciousness. Sometimes, however, it may be
seen that a person in Krsna consciousness commits some act which may be
taken as most abominable socially or politically. But such a temporary falldown
does not disqualify him. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that if a person
falls down but is wholeheartedly engaged in the transcendental serVice of the
Supreme Lord, the Lord, being situated within his heart, purifies him and
excuses him from that abomination. The material contamination is so strong
that even a yogi fully engaged in the serVice of the Lord sometimes becomes
ensnared; but Krsna consciousness is so strong that such an occasional
falldown is at once rectified. Therefore the process of devotional serVice is
always a success. No one should deride a devotee for some accidental falldown
from the ideal path, for, as explained in the next verse, such occasional
falldowns will be stopped in due course, as soon as a devotee is completely
situated in Krsna consciousness.

Therefore a person who is situated in Krsna consciousness and is engaged
with determination in the process of chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare should be
considered to be in the transcendental position, even if by chance or accident
he is found to have fallen. The words sadhm' eva, “he is saintly,” are very
emphatic. They are a warning to the nondevotees that because of an
accidental falldown a devotee should not be derided; he should still be
considered saintly even if he has accidentally fallen down. And the word
mantavyah is still more emphatic. If one does not follow this rule, and derides a
devotee for his accidental falldown, then one is disobeying the order of the
Supreme Lord. The only qualification of a devotee is to be unflinchingly and
exclusively engaged in devotional serVice.



In the Nrsimha Purc‘ma the following statement is given:

bhagavati ca harc‘w ancmya—cetc‘i
bhrs’a—malino ’pi virajate manusyah
71a hi s’as’a—kalusa-cchabih kadc‘icit
timira-parabhavatam upaiti candrah

The meaning is that even if one fully engaged in the devotional serVice of
the Lord is sometimes found engaged in abominable activities, these activities
should be considered to be like the spots that resemble the mark of a rabbit on
the moon. Such spots do not become an impediment to the diffusion of
moonlight. Similarly, the accidental falldown of a devotee from the path of
saintly character does not make him abominable.

On the other hand, one should not misunderstand that a devotee in
transcendental devotional serVice can act in all kinds of abominable ways; this
verse only refers to an accident due to the strong power of material
connections. Devotional serVice is more or less a declaration of war against the
illusory energy. As long as one is not strong enough to fight the illusory
energy, there may be accidental falldowns. But when one is strong enough, he
is no longer subjected to such falldowns, as previously explained. No one
should take advantage of this verse and commit nonsense and think that he is
still a devotee. If he does not improve in his character by devotional service,
then it is to be understood that he is not a high devotee.

TEXT 31

mmmamﬁamaa.
ﬁﬁmﬁﬁW:mﬁu39u

ksipram bhavati dharmc‘itmc‘i
s’as’vac—chc‘mtim nigacchati
kaunteya pratijc‘mihi
71a me bhaktah pranas’yati



SYNONYMS

ksipram—very soon; bhavati—becomes; dharma—c‘itmc‘i—righteous;
s’as’vat—s’c‘mtim—lasting peace; nigacchati—attains; kaunteya—O son of Kunti;
pratijc‘mihi—declare; na—never; me—My; bhaktah—devotee;
pranas’yati—perishes.

TRANSLATION

He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. 0 son of Kunti,
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.

PURPORT

This should not be misunderstood. In the Seventh Chapter the Lord says
that one who is engaged in mischievous activities cannot become a devotee of
the Lord. One who is not a devotee of the Lord has no good qualifications
whatsoever. The question remains, then, How can a person engaged in
abominable actiVities—either by accident or by intention—be a pure devotee?
This question may justly be raised. The miscreants, as stated in the Seventh
Chapter, who never come to the devotional serVice of the Lord, have no good
qualifications, as is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Generally, a devotee who
is engaged in the nine kinds of devotional activities is engaged in the process
of cleansing all material contamination from the heart. He puts the Supreme
Personality of Godhead within his heart, and all sinful contaminations are
naturally washed away. Continuous thinking of the Supreme Lord makes him
pure by nature. According to the Vedas, there is a certain regulation that if
one falls down from his exalted position he has to undergo certain ritualistic
processes to purify himself. But here there is no such condition, because the
purifying process is already there in the heart of the devotee, due to his
remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead constantly. Therefore, the
chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare should be continued without stoppage.



This will protect a devotee from all accidental falldowns. He will thus remain
perpetually free from all material contaminations.

TEXT 32

niﬁmefsarcrrfélaﬁﬁegzqrqﬁwu
mammmzﬁréﬁmﬁwﬁwmusqu

mam hi pc‘mha vyapc‘is’ritya
ye ’pi syuh papa—yonayah

striyo vais’yc‘is tathd s’ﬁdras
te ’pi yc‘mti parc‘m’t gatim

SYNONYMS

mam—of Me; hi—certainly; pc‘mha—O son of Prtha; vyapc‘is’ritya—particularly
taking shelter; ye—those who; api—also; syuh—are; papa—yonayah—born of a
lower family; striyah—women; vais’yah—mercantile people; tathc't—also;
s’ﬁdrc‘th—lower-class men; te api—even they; yc‘mti—go; parc‘tm—to the
supreme; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth—women, vaisyas [merchants] and sﬁdras [workers]—can attain the
supreme destination.

PURPORT

It is clearly declared here by the Supreme Lord that in devotional serVice
there is no distinction between the lower and higher classes of people. In the
material conception of life there are such divisions, but for a person engaged in
transcendental devotional serVice to the Lord there are not. Everyone is
eligible for the supreme destination. In the grimad-Bbégavatam (2.4.18) it is



stated that even the lowest, who are called caudalas (dog-eaters), can be
purified by association with a pure devotee. Therefore devotional serVice and
the guidance of a pure devotee are so strong that there is no discrimination
between the lower and higher classes of men; anyone can take to it. The most
simple man taking shelter of the pure devotee can be purified by proper
guidance. According to the different modes of material nature, men are
classified in the mode of goodness (brahmanas), the mode of passion (ksatriyas,
or administrators), the mixed modes of passion and ignorance (vais’yas, or
merchants), and the mode of ignorance (s’ﬁdms, or workers). Those lower than
them are called caudalas, and they are born in sinful families. Generally, the
association of those born in sinful families is not accepted by the higher
classes. But the process of devotional serVice is so strong that the pure devotee
of the Supreme Lord can enable people of all the lower classes to attain the
highest perfection of life. This is possible only when one takes shelter of Krsna.
As indicated here by the word vyapc'ts’ritya, one has to take shelter completely
of Krsna. Then one can become much greater than great jﬁc‘mis and yogis.

TEXT 33

ﬁwmzwwmﬁaaml
WWWWWMSH

kim punar brahmanah puma
bhaktc‘i rajarsayas tathd
anityam asukham lokam

imam prc‘tpya bhajasva mam

SYNONYMS

kim—how much; punah—again; brahmanah—brahmanas; punyc‘ih—righteous;
bhaktc‘ih—devotees; raja-Tsayah—saintly kings; tathc‘i—also;
anityam—temporary; asukham—full of miseries; lokam—planet; imam—this;
prc‘tpya—gaining; bhajasva—be engaged in loving service; mam—unto Me.



TRANSLATION

How much more this is so of the righteous brahmanas, the devotees and the
saintly kings. Therefore, having come to this temporary, miserable world,
engage in loving service unto Me.

PURPORT

In this material world there are classifications of people, but, after all, this
world is not a happy place for anyone. It is clearly stated here, cmityam
asukham lokam: this world is temporary and full of miseries, not habitable for
any sane gentleman. This world is declared by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead to be temporary and full of miseries. Some philosophers, especially
Mayavadi philosophers, say that this world is false, but we can understand from
Bhagavad-gitc‘t that the world is not false; it is temporary. There is a difference
between temporary and false. This world is temporary, but there is another
world, which is eternal. This world is miserable, but the other world is eternal
and blissful.

Arjuna was born in a saintly royal family. To him also the Lord says, “Take
to My devotional serVice and come quickly back to Godhead, back home.” No
one should remain in this temporary world, full as it is with miseries. Everyone
should attach himself to the bosom of the Supreme Personality of Godhead so
that he can be eternally happy. The devotional serVice of the Supreme Lord is
the only process by which all problems of all classes of men can be solved.
Everyone should therefore take to Krsna consciousness and make his life
perfect.

TEXT 34

WWWWHT’WI
WWWHIBBH

man—mana bhava mad—bhakto



mad—yc‘iji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi yuktvaivam
atmc‘mam mat—parc‘iyanah

SYNONYMS

mat—mam‘ih—always thinking of Me; bhava—become; mat—My;
bhaktah—devotee; mat—My; yc‘tji—worshiper; mam—unto Me;
namaskuru—offer obeisances; mam—unto Me; eva—completely; esyasi—you
will come; yukwd—being absorbed; evam—thus; atmc‘mam—your soul;
mat-parc‘iyanah—devoted to Me.

TRANSLATION

Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer
obeisances to Me and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you
will come to Me.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly indicated that Krsna consciousness is the only
means of being delivered from the clutches of this contaminated material
world. Sometimes unscrupulous commentators distort the meaning of what is
clearly stated here: that all devotional serVice should be offered to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Unfortunately, unscrupulous
commentators divert the mind of the reader to that which is not at all feasible.
Such commentators do not know that there is no difference between Krsna’s
mind and Krsna. Krsna is not an ordinary human being; He is Absolute Truth.
His body, His mind and He Himself are one and absolute. It is stated in the
Karma Purana. as it is quoted by Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami in his
Anubhasya comments on Caitanya—caritamrta (Fifth Chapter, Adi-lilc‘i, verses
41—48), deha-dehi—vibhedo ’yam nes’vare vidyate kvacit. This means that there is
no difference in Krsna, the Supreme Lord, between Himself and His body. But
because the commentators do not know this science of Krsna, they hide Krsna



and divide His personality from His mind or from His body. Although this is
sheer ignorance of the science of Krsna, some men make profit out of
misleading people.

There are some who are demonic; they also think of Krsna, but enviously,
just like King Kamsa, Krsna’s uncle. He was also thinking of Krsna always, but
he thought of Krsna as his enemy. He was always in anxiety, wondering when
Krsna would come to kill him. That kind of thinking will not help us. One
should be thinking of Krsna in devotional love. That is bhakti. One should
cultivate the knowledge of Krsna continuously. What is that favorable
cultivation? It is to learn from a bona fide teacher. Krsna is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and we have several times explained that His body is
not material, but is eternal, blissful knowledge. This kind of talk about Krsna
will help one become a devotee. Understanding Krsna otherwise, from the
wrong source, will prove fruitless.

One should therefore engage his mind in the eternal form, the primal form
of Krsna; with conviction in his heart that Krsna is the Supreme, he should
engage himself in worship. There are hundreds of thousands of temples in
India for the worship of Krsna, and devotional serVice is practiced there.
When such practice is made, one has to offer obeisances to Krsna. One should
lower his head before the Deity and engage his mind, his body, his
actiVities—everything. That will make one fully absorbed in Krsna without
deviation. This will help one transfer to the Krsnaloka. One should not be
deviated by unscrupulous commentators. One must engage in the nine
different processes of devotional service, beginning with hearing and chanting
about Krsna. Pure devotional serVice is the highest achievement of human
society.

The Seventh and Eighth chapters of Bhagavad-gitc‘t have explained pure
devotional serVice to the Lord that is free from speculative knowledge, mystic
yoga and fruitive activities. Those who are not purely sanctified may be
attracted by different features of the Lord like the impersonal brahmajyoti and
localized Paramatma, but a pure devotee directly takes to the serVice of the
Supreme Lord.

There is a beautiful poem about Krsna in which it is clearly stated that any



person who is engaged in the worship of demigods is most unintelligent and
cannot achieve at any time the supreme award of Krsna. The devotee, in the
beginning, may sometimes fall from the standard, but still he should be
considered superior to all other philosophers and yogis. One who always
engages in Krsna consciousness should be understood to be a perfectly saintly
person. His accidental nondevotional activities will diminish, and he will soon
be situated without any doubt in complete perfection. The pure devotee has no
actual chance to fall down, because the Supreme Godhead personally takes
care of His pure devotees. Therefore, the intelligent person should take
directly to the process of Krsna consciousness and happily live in this material
world. He will eventually receive the supreme award of Krsna.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Ninth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Most Confidential Knowledge.

The Opulence of the Absolute

 

TEXT 1

51"”5'56” .
wmmmﬁwaazl
uﬁsa‘n‘iwnuamﬁrfﬁamwu 9 ||

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
bhﬁya eva mahc‘t-bc‘tho
s’mu me paramam vacah



yat te ’ham priyamc‘mc‘tya
vaksyc‘tmi hita—kc‘tmyayc‘t

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
bhﬁyah—again; eva—certainly; mahc‘t-bc‘tho—O mighty-armed; s’mu—just
hear; me—My; paramam—supreme; vacah—instruction; yat—that which;
te—to you; aham—I; priyamc‘mc‘tya—thinking you dear to Me; vaksyc‘tmi—say;
hita-kc‘tmyayc‘t—for your benefit.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Listen again, 0 mighty-armed
Arjuna. Because you are My dear friend, for your benefit I shall speak to you
further, giving knowledge that is better than what I have already explained.

PURPORT

The word bhagavc‘m is explained thus by Paras’ara Muni: one who is full in
siX opulences, who has full strength, full fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty and
renunciation, is Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. While
Krsna was present on this earth, He displayed all siX opulences. Therefore
great sages like Paras’ara Muni have all accepted Krsna as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Now Krsna is instructing Arjuna in more confidential
knowledge of His opulences and His work. Previously, beginning with the
Seventh Chapter, the Lord has already explained His different energies and
how they are acting. Now in this chapter He explains His specific opulences to
Arjuna. In the previous chapter He has clearly explained His different
energies to establish devotion in firm conviction. Again in this chapter He
tells Arjuna about His manifestations and various opulences.

The more one hears about the Supreme God, the more one becomes fixed
in devotional serVice. One should always hear about the Lord in the
association of devotees; that will enhance one’s devotional serVice. Discourses



in the society of devotees can take place only among those who are really
anxious to be in Krsna consciousness. Others cannot take part in such
discourses. The Lord clearly tells Arjuna that because Arjuna is very dear to
Him, for his benefit such discourses are taking place.

TEXT 2

ﬁﬁﬁQthmﬁWH
WWWHWHIQM

ha me viduh sura—ganc‘th
prabhavam ha maharsayah
aham c‘tdir hi devc‘mc‘tm
maharsinc‘tm ca sarvas’ah

SYNONYMS

na—never; me—My; viduh—know; sura—ganc‘th—the demigods;
prabhavam—origin, opulences; na—never; mahc‘t—Tsayah—great sages; aham—I
am; c'tdih—the origin; hi—certainly; devc‘mc‘tm—of the demigods;
mahc‘t—Tsinc‘tm—of the great sages; ca—also; sarvas’ah—in all respects.

TRANSLATION

Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin or
opulences, for, in every respect, I am the source of the demigods and sages.

PURPORT

As stated in the Brahma-samhitc't, Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord. No one
is greater than Him; He is the cause of all causes. Here it is also stated by the
Lord personally that He is the cause of all the demigods and sages. Even the
demigods and great sages cannot understand Krsna; they can understand
neither His name nor His personality, so what is the position of the so-called



scholars of this tiny planet? No one can understand why this Supreme God
comes to earth as an ordinary human being and executes such wonderful,
uncommon activities. One should know, then, that scholarship is not the
qualification necessary to understand Krsna. Even the demigods and the great
sages have tried to understand Krsna by their mental speculation, and they
have failed to do so. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is clearly said that even
the great demigods are not able to understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. They can speculate to the limits of their imperfect senses and can
reach the opposite conclusion of impersonalism, of something not manifested
by the three qualities of material nature, or they can imagine something by
mental speculation, but it is not possible to understand Krsna by such foolish
speculation.

Here the Lord indirectly says that if anyone wants to know the Absolute
Truth, “Here I am present as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I am the
Supreme.” One should know this. Although one cannot understand the
inconceivable Lord who is personally present, He nonetheless exists. We can
actually understand Krsna, who is eternal, full of bliss and knowledge, simply
by studying His words in Bhagavad-gitc‘t and Srimad—Bhagavatam. The
conception of God as some ruling power or as the impersonal Brahman can be
reached by persons who are in the inferior energy of the Lord, but the
Personality of Godhead cannot be conceived unless one is in the
transcendental position.

Because most men cannot understand Krsna in His actual situation, out of
His causeless mercy He descends to show favor to such speculators. Yet despite
the Supreme Lord’s uncommon activities, these speculators, due to
contamination in the material energy, still think that the impersonal Brahman
is the Supreme. Only the devotees who are fully surrendered unto the Supreme
Lord can understand, by the grace of the Supreme Personality, that He is
Krsna. The devotees of the Lord do not bother about the impersonal Brahman
conception of God; their faith and devotion bring them to surrender
immediately unto the Supreme Lord, and out of the causeless mercy of Krsna
they can understand Krsna. No one else can understand Him. So even great
sages agree: What is c'ttmc't, what is the Supreme? It is He whom we have to



worship.

TEXT 3

aimnamﬁaaﬁraﬁm‘a‘aml
Wzanﬁgaémﬁzmﬁusu

yo mam ajam anadim ca
vetti loka-mahes’varam

asammﬁdhah sa martyesu

sarva—pc‘tpaih pramucyate

SYNONYMS

yah—anyone who; mc‘tm—Me; ajam—unborn; anadim—without beginning;
ca—also; vetti—knows; loka—of the planets; mahc‘t—is’varam—the supreme
master; asammﬁdhah—undeluded; sah—he; martyesu—among those subject to
death; sarva—pc‘tpaih—from all sinful reactions; pramucyate—is delivered.

TRANSLATION

He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme Lord
of all the worlds—he only, undeluded among men, is freed from all sins.

PURPORT

As stated in the Seventh Chapter (7.3), manusyc‘mc‘tm sahasresu kas’cid yatati
siddhaye: those who are trying to elevate themselves to the platform of
spiritual realization are not ordinary men; they are superior to millions and
millions of ordinary men who have no knowledge of spiritual realization. But
out of those actually trying to understand their spiritual situation, one who
can come to the understanding that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the proprietor of everything, the unborn, is the most successful
spiritually realized person. In that stage only, when one has fully understood



Krsna’s supreme position, can one be free completely from all sinful reactions.

Here the Lord is described by the word aja, meaning “unborn,” but He is
distinct from the living entities who are described in the Second Chapter as
aja. The Lord is different from the living entities who are taking birth and
dying due to material attachment. The conditioned souls are changing their
bodies, but His body is not changeable. Even when He comes to this material
world, He comes as the same unborn; therefore in the Fourth Chapter it is said
that the Lord, by His internal potency, is not under the inferior, material
energy, but is always in the superior energy.

In this verse the words vetti loka-mahes’varam indicate that one should know
that Lord Krsna is the supreme proprietor of the planetary systems of the
universe. He was existing before the creation, and He is different from His
creation. All the demigods were created within this material world, but as far
as Krsna is concerned, it is said that He is not created; therefore Krsna is
different even from the great demigods like Brahma and Siva. And because He
is the creator of Brahma, Siva and all the other demigods, He is the Supreme
Person of all planets.

Sri Krsna is therefore different from everything that is created, and anyone
who knows Him as such immediately becomes liberated from all sinful
reactions. One must be liberated from all sinful activities to be in the
knowledge of the Supreme Lord. Only by devotional serVice can He be known
and not by any other means, as stated in Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

One should not try to understand Krsna as a human being. As stated
previously, only a foolish person thinks Him to be a human being. This is again
expressed here in a different way. A man who is not foolish, who is intelligent
enough to understand the constitutional position of the Godhead, is always
free from all sinful reactions.

If Krsna is known as the son of Devaki, then how can He be unborn? That
is also explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam: When He appeared before Devaki
and Vasudeva, He was not born as an ordinary child; He appeared in His
original form, and then He transformed Himself into an ordinary child.

Anything done under the direction of Krsna is transcendental. It cannot be
contaminated by material reactions, which may be auspicious or inauspicious.



The conception that there are things auspicious and inauspicious in the
material world is more or less a mental concoction because there is nothing
auspicious in the material world. Everything is inauspicious because the very
material nature is inauspicious. We simply imagine it to be auspicious. Real
auspiciousness depends on activities in Krsna consciousness in full devotion
and serVice. Therefore if we at all want our activities to be auspicious, then we
should work under the directions of the Supreme Lord. Such directions are
given in authoritative scriptures such as Srimad-Bhagavatam and
Bhagavad-gitc‘t, or from a bona fide spiritual master. Because the spiritual
master is the representative of the Supreme Lord, his direction is directly the
direction of the Supreme Lord. The spiritual master, saintly persons and
scriptures direct in the same way. There is no contradiction in these three
sources. All actions done under such direction are free from the reactions of
pious or impious activities of this material world. The transcendental attitude
of the devotee in the performance of activities is actually that of renunciation,
and this is called sannyc'tsa. As stated in the first verse of the Sixth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t, one who acts as a matter of duty because he has been ordered to
do so by the Supreme Lord, and who does not seek shelter in the fruits of his
activities (ancis’ritah karma-phalam), is a true renouncer. Anyone acting under
the direction of the Supreme Lord is actually a scmnyc'tsi and a yogi, and not the
man who has simply taken the dress of the sannyc'tsi, or a pseudo yogi.

TEXTS 4—5

Wwwaﬁmmu
alégﬁaa‘rsaﬁwamﬁaaueu
aﬁmmgﬁaﬁaﬂmﬁswn
Wwwmwwﬁwulzu

buddhir jﬁc‘mam asammohah
ksamc‘t satyam damah s’amah

sukham duhkham bhavo ’bhc‘wo



bhayam cc‘tbhayam eva ca

ahimsc‘t samatc‘t tustis
tapo dc‘mam yas’o ’yas’ah
bhavcmti bhc‘wc‘t bhmanam
matta eva prthag—vidhc‘th

SYNONYMS

buddhih—intelligence; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; asammohah—freedom from
doubt; ksamc‘t—forgiveness; satyam—truthfulness; damah—control of the
senses; s’amah—control of the mind; sukham—happiness; duhkham—distress;
bhavah—birth; abhc‘wah—death; bhayam—fear; ca—also;
abhayam—fearlessness; eva—also; ca—and; ahimsc‘t—nonviolence;
samatc‘t—equilibrium; tustih—satisfaction; tapah—penance; dc‘mam—charity;
yas’ah—fame; ayas’ah—infamy; bhavcmti—come about; bhc‘wc‘th—natures;
bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm—of living entities; mattah—from Me; eva—certainly;
prthak-vidhc‘th—variously arranged.

TRANSLATION

Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness,
truthfulness, control of the senses, control of the mind, happiness and distress,
birth, death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity,
charity, fame and infamy—all these various qualities of living beings are created
by Me alone.

PURPORT

The different qualities of living entities, be they good or bad, are all created
by Krsna, and they are described here.
Intelligence refers to the power to analyze things in their proper
perspective, and knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit and what is
matter. Ordinary knowledge obtained by a university education pertains only
to matter, and it is not accepted here as knowledge. Knowledge means



knowing the distinction between spirit and matter. In modern education there
is no knowledge about spirit; they are simply taking care of the material
elements and bodily needs. Therefore academic knowledge is not complete.
Asammoha, freedom from doubt and delusion, can be achieved when one is
not hesitant and when he understands the transcendental philosophy. Slowly
but surely he becomes free from bewilderment. Nothing should be accepted
blindly; everything should be accepted with care and with caution. Ksamc't,
tolerance and forgiveness, should be practiced; one should be tolerant and
excuse the minor offenses of others. Satyam, truthfulness, means that facts
should be presented as they are, for the benefit of others. Facts should not be
misrepresented. According to social conventions, it is said that one can speak
the truth only when it is palatable to others. But that is not truthfulness. The
truth should be spoken in a straightforward way, so that others will understand
actually what the facts are. If a man is a thief and if people are warned that he
is a thief, that is truth. Although sometimes the truth is unpalatable, one
should not refrain from speaking it. Truthfulness demands that the facts be
presented as they are for the benefit of others. That is the definition of truth.
Control of the senses means that the senses should not be used for
unnecessary personal enjoyment. There is no prohibition against meeting the
proper needs of the senses, but unnecessary sense enjoyment is detrimental for
spiritual advancement. Therefore the senses should be restrained from
unnecessary use. Similarly, one should restrain the mind from unnecessary
thoughts; that is called s’ama. One should not spend one’s time pondering over
earning money. That is a misuse of the thinking power. The mind should be
used to understand the prime necessity of human beings, and that should be
presented authoritatively. The power of thought should be developed in
association with persons who are authorities in the scriptures, saintly persons
and spiritual masters and those whose thinking is highly developed. Sukham,
pleasure or happiness, should always be in that which is favorable for the
cultivation of the spiritual knowledge of Krsna consciousness. And similarly,
that which is painful or which causes distress is that which is unfavorable for
the cultivation of Krsna consciousness. Anything favorable for the
development of Krsna consciousness should be accepted, and anything



unfavorable should be rejected.

Bhava, birth, should be understood to refer to the body. As far as the soul is
concerned, there is neither birth nor death; that we have discussed in the
beginning of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Birth and death apply to one’s embodiment in the
material world. Fear is due to worrying about the future. A person in Krsna
consciousness has no fear because by his activities he is sure to go back to the
spiritual sky, back home, back to Godhead. Therefore his future is very bright.
Others, however, do not know what their future holds; they have no
knowledge of what the next life holds. 80 they are therefore in constant
anxiety. If we want to get free from anxiety, then the best course is to
understand Krsna and be situated always in Krsna consciousness. In that way
we will be free from all fear. In the grimad-Bbégavatam (11.2.37) it is stated,
bhayam dvitiyc‘tbhinives’atah syc‘tt: fear is caused by our absorption in the illusory
energy. But those who are free from the illusory energy, those who are
confident that they are not the material body, that they are spiritual parts of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and who are therefore engaged in the
transcendental serVice of the Supreme Godhead, have nothing to fear. Their
future is very bright. This fear is a condition of persons who are not in Krsna
consciousness. Abhayam, fearlessness, is possible only for one in Krsna
consciousness.

Ahimsc't, nonviolence, means that one should not do anything which will
put others into misery or confusion. Material activities that are promised by so
many politicians, sociologists, philanthropists, etc., do not produce very good
results because the politicians and philanthropists have no transcendental
Vision; they do not know what is actually beneficial for human society. Ahimsc't
means that people should be trained in such a way that the full utilization of
the human body can be achieved. The human body is meant for spiritual
realization, so any movement or any commissions which do not further that
end commit Violence on the human body. That which furthers the future
spiritual happiness of the people in general is called nonviolence.

Samatc't, equanimity, refers to freedom from attachment and aversion. To be
very much attached or to be very much detached is not the best. This material
world should be accepted without attachment or aversion. That which is



favorable for prosecuting Krsna consciousness should be accepted; that which
is unfavorable should be rejected. That is called samatc't, equanimity. A person
in Krsna consciousness has nothing to reject and nothing to accept save in
terms of its usefulness in the prosecution of Krsna consciousness.

Tusti, satisfaction, means that one should not be eager to gather more and
more material goods by unnecessary activity. One should be satisfied with
whatever is obtained by the grace of the Supreme Lord; that is called
satisfaction. Tapas means austerity or penance. There are many rules and
regulations in the Vedas which apply here, like rising early in the morning and
taking a bath. Sometimes it is very troublesome to rise early in the morning,
but whatever voluntary trouble one may suffer in this way is called penance.
Similarly, there are prescriptions for fasting on certain days of the month. One
may not be inclined to practice such fasting, but because of his determination
to make advancement in the science of Krsna consciousness, he should accept
such bodily troubles when they are recommended. However, one should not
fast unnecessarily or against Vedic injunctions. One should not fast for some
political purpose; that is described in Bhagavad-gitc‘t as fasting in ignorance,
and anything done in ignorance or passion does not lead to spiritual
advancement. Everything done in the mode of goodness does advance one,
however, and fasting done in terms of the Vedic injunctions enriches one in
spiritual knowledge.

As far as charity is concerned, one should give fifty percent of his earnings
to some good cause. And what is a good cause? It is that which is conducted in
terms of Krsna consciousness. That is not only a good cause, but the best cause.
Because Krsna is good, His cause is also good. Thus charity should be given to a
person who is engaged in Krsna consciousness. According to Vedic literature,
it is enjoined that charity should be given to the brc‘thmanas. This practice is
still followed, although not very nicely in terms of the Vedic injunction. But
still the injunction is that charity should be given to the brc‘thmanas. \Why.7
Because they are engaged in higher cultivation of spiritual knowledge. A
brc‘thmana is supposed to devote his whole life to understanding Brahman.
Brahma jc‘mc‘ttiti brc‘thmanah: one who knows Brahman is called a brc‘thmana.
Thus charity is offered to the brc‘thmanas because they are always engaged in



higher spiritual serVice and have no time to earn their livelihood. In the Vedic
literature, charity is also to be awarded to one in the renounced order of life,
the sannyasi TTuzsannyasB beg ﬁxnn door to door,run:for nnoney but for
missionary purposes. The system is that they go from door to door to awaken
the householders from the slumber of ignorance. Because the householders are
engaged in family affairs and have forgotten their actual purpose in
life—awakening their Krsna consciousness—it is the business of the scmnyc'tsis
to go as beggars to the householders and encourage them to be Krsna
conscious. As it is said in the Vedas, one should awake and achieve what is due
him in this human form of life. This knowledge and method is distributed by
the sannyc'tsis; hence charity is to be given to the renouncer of life, to the
brc‘thmanas, and similar good causes, not to any whimsical cause.

Yas’as, fame, should be according to Lord Caitanya, who said that a man is
famous when he is known as a great devotee. That is real fame. If one has
become a great man in Krsna consciousness and it is known, then he is truly
famous. One who does not have such fame is infamous.

All these qualities are manifest throughout the universe in human society
and in the society of the demigods. There are many forms of humanity on
other planets, and these qualities are there. Now, for one who wants to
advance in Krsna consciousness, Krsna creates all these qualities, but the
person develops them himself from within. One who engages in the devotional
serVice of the Supreme Lord develops all the good qualities, as arranged by the
Supreme Lord.

Of whatever we find, good or bad, the origin is Krsna. Nothing can
manifest itself in this material world which is not in Krsna. That is knowledge;
although we know that things are differently situated, we should realize that
everything flows from Krsna.

TEXT 6

Wzmﬁac—aﬁmaaml
Wmmwmwzwulau



maharsayah sapta pﬁrve
catvc‘tro manavas tathd
mad-bhc‘wc‘t mc‘masc‘t jc‘ttc‘t
yesc‘tm loka imt‘th prajc‘th

SYNONYMS

mahc‘t—Tsayah—the great sages; sapta—seven; pﬁrve—before; catvc‘trah—four;
manavah—Manus; tathc‘t—also; mat-bhc‘wc‘th—born of Me; mc‘masc‘th—from the
mind; jc‘ttc‘th—born; yesc‘tm—of them; loke—in the world; imt‘th—all this;
prajc'th—population.

TRANSLATION

The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and the
Manus [progenitors of mankind] come from Me, born from My mind, and all
the living beings populating the various planets descend from them.

PURPORT

The Lord is giving a genealogical synopsis of the universal population.
Brahma is the original creature born out of the energy of the Supreme Lord,
who is known as Hiranyagarbha. And from Brahma all the seven great sages,
and before them four other great sages, named Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and
Sanat-kumara, and the Manus, are manifested. All these twenty-five great
sages are known as the patriarchs of the living entities all over the universe.
There are innumerable universes and innumerable planets within each
universe, and each planet is full of population of different varieties. All of
them are born of these twenty-five patriarchs. Brahma underwent penance for
one thousand years of the demigods before he realized by the grace of Krsna
how to create. Then from Brahma came Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and
Sanat-kumara, then Rudra, and then the seven sages, and in this way all the
brc‘thmanas and ksatriyas are born out of the energy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Brahma is known as Pitamaha, the grandfather, and Krsna is



known as Pmpitc'tmaha, the father of the grandfather. That is stated in the
Eleventh Chapter of the Bbagavad—gita (11.39).

TEXT 7

Qaiﬁwﬁﬁﬁamﬁtaﬁrar—oﬁzl
a‘rsmaﬁﬁgaﬁma‘mzuwu

etc‘tm vibhﬁtim yogam ca

mama yo vetti tattvatah
so ’vikalpena yogena

yujyate nc‘ttra sams’ayah

SYNONYMS

etdm—all this; vibhﬁtim—opulence; yogam—mystic power; ca—also;
mama—of Mine; yah—anyone who; vetti—knows; tattvatah—factually;
sah—he; avikalpena—without division; yogena—in devotional service;
yujyate—is engaged; na—never; atra—here; sams’ayah—doubt.

TRANSLATION

One who is factually convinced of this opulence and mystic power of Mine
engages in unalloyed devotional service; of this there is no doubt.

PURPORT

The highest summit of spiritual perfection is knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unless one is firmly convinced of the different
opulences of the Supreme Lord, he cannot engage in devotional serVice.
Generally people know that God is great, but they do not know in detail how
God is great. Here are the details. If one knows factually how God is great,
then naturally he becomes a surrendered soul and engages himself in the
devotional serVice of the Lord. When one factually knows the opulences of the



Supreme, there is no alternative but to surrender to Him. This factual
knowledge can be known from the descriptions in Srimad-Bhagavatam and
Bhagavad-gitc‘t and similar literatures.

In the administration of this universe there are many demigods distributed
throughout the planetary system, and the chief of them are Brahma, Lord Siva
and the four great Kumaras and the other patriarchs. There are many
forefathers of the population of the universe, and all of them are born of the
Supreme Lord, Krsna. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the
original forefather of all forefathers.

These are some of the opulences of the Supreme Lord. When one is firmly
convinced of them, he accepts Krsna with great faith and without any doubt,
and he engages in devotional serVice. All this particular knowledge is required
in order to increase one’s interest in the loving devotional serVice of the Lord.
One should not neglect to understand fully how great Krsna is, for by knowing
the greatness of Krsna one will be able to be fixed in sincere devotional
serV1ce.

TEXT 8

agaémmmzaéaaﬁl
gﬁwmniwamﬁamzuw

aham sarvasya prabhavo

mattah sarvam pravartate
iti matvc‘t bhajante mam

budhc‘t bhdUa—samanvitc‘th

SYNONYMS

aham—I; sarvasya—of all; prabhavah—the source of generation;
mattah—from Me; sarvam—everything; pravartate—emanates; iti—thus;
matvc‘t—knowing; bhajante—become devoted; mc‘tm—unto Me; budhc‘th—the
learned; bhc‘wa—samanvitc‘th—with great attention.



TRANSLATION

I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates
from Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in My devotional service
and worship Me with all their hearts.

PURPORT

A learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly and has information
from authorities like Lord Caitanya and who knows how to apply these
teachings can understand that Krsna is the origin of everything in both the
material and spiritual worlds, and because he knows this perfectly he becomes
firmly fixed in the devotional serVice of the Supreme Lord. He can never be
deviated by any amount of nonsensical commentaries or by fools. All Vedic
literature agrees that Krsna is the source of Brahma, Siva and all other
demigods. In the Atharva Veda (Gopéla-tépam‘ Upam'saa 1.24) it is said, yo
brahmc‘mam vidadhc‘tti pﬁrvam yo vai vedams’ ca gc‘tpayati sma krsnah: “It was
Krsna who in the beginning instructed Brahma in Vedic knowledge and who

”

disseminated Vedic knowledge in the past. Then again the Néréyarza
Upam'saa (1) says, atha puruso ha vai nc‘trc‘tyano ’kc‘tmayata prajc‘th srjeyeti: “Then
the Supreme Personality Narayana desired to create living entities.” The
Upcmisad continues, nc‘trc‘tyanc‘td brahmc‘t jc‘tyate, nc‘trc‘tyanc‘td prajc‘tpatih prajc‘tyate,
nc‘trc‘tyanc‘td indro jc‘tyate, nc‘trc‘tyanc‘td astau vasavo jc‘tycmte, nc‘trc‘tyanc‘td ekc‘tdas’a
rudrc‘t jc‘tycmte, nc‘trc‘tyanc‘td dvc‘tdas’c‘tdityc‘th: “From Narayana, Brahma is born, and
from Narayana the patriarchs are also born. From Narayana, Indra is born,
from Narayana the eight Vasus are born, from Narayana the eleven Rudras are
born, from Narayana the twelve Adityas are born.” This Narayana is an
expansion of Krsna.

It is said in the same Vedas, brahmanyo devaki-putrah: “The son of Devaki,
Krsna, is the Supreme Personality.” (Néréyarza Upam'saa 4) Then it is said, eko
vai nc‘trc‘tyana c‘tsin ha brahmc‘t ha is’c‘mo nc‘tpo nagni-samau heme dyav-c‘tprthivi ha
naksatrc‘mi ha sﬁryah: “In the beginning of the creation there was only the
Supreme Personality Narayana. There was no Brahma, no Siva, no water, no



fire, no moon, no stars in the sky, no sun.” (M3115 Upam'saa 1) In the Mahc't
Upcmisad it is also said that Lord Siva was born from the forehead of the
Supreme Lord. Thus the Vedas say that it is the Supreme Lord, the creator of
Brahma and Siva, who is to be worshiped.

In the Moksa—dharma Krsna also says,

prajc‘tpatim ca rudram cc‘tpy
aham eva srjc‘tmi vai
tau hi mam ha vijc‘mito
mama mc‘tyc‘t-vimohitau
“The patriarchs, Siva and others are created by Me, though they do not

know that they are created by Me because they are deluded by My illusory
energy.” In the Vart‘tha Purc‘ma it is also said,

nc‘trc‘tyanah paro devas
tasmc‘tj jc‘ttas’ caturmukhah
tasmc‘td rudro ’bhavad devah
sa ca sarva—jﬁatc‘tm gatah

“Narayana is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and from Him Brahma
was born, from whom Siva was born.”

Lord Krsna is the source of all generations, and He is called the most
efficient cause of everything. He says, “Because everything is born of Me, I am
the original source of all. Everything is under Me; no one is above Me.” There
is no supreme controller other than Krsna. One who understands Krsna in
such a way from a bona fide spiritual master, with references from Vedic
literature, engages all his energy in Krsna consciousness and becomes a truly
learned man. In comparison to him, all others, who do not know Krsna
properly, are but fools. Only a fool would consider Krsna to be an ordinary
man. A Krsna conscious person should not be bewildered by fools; he should
avoid all unauthorized commentaries and interpretations on Bhagavad-gitc‘t and
proceed in Krsna consciousness with determination and firmness.

TEXT 9



trﬁatmmnélmazml
$Waniﬁei§sqﬁ=ramﬁ=rausu

mac—cittc‘t mad—gata—prc‘mc‘t
bodhayantah parasparam
kathaycmtas’ ca mam nityam
tusycmti ca ramcmti ca

SYNONYMS

mat—cittc‘th—their minds fully engaged in Me; mat—gata—prc‘mc‘th—their lives
devoted to Me; bodhayantah—preaching; parasparam—among themselves;
kathayantah—talking; ca—also; mc‘tm—about Me; nityam—perpetually;
tusycmti—become pleased; ca—also; ramcmti—enjoy transcendental bliss;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are fully devoted
to My service, and they derive great satisfaction and bliss from always
enlightening one another and conversing about Me.

PURPORT

Pure devotees, whose characteristics are mentioned here, engage themselves
fully in the transcendental loving serVice of the Lord. Their minds cannot be
diverted from the lotus feet of Krsna. Their talks are solely on the
transcendental subjects. The symptoms of the pure devotees are described in
this verse specifically. Devotees of the Supreme Lord are twenty-four hours
daily engaged in glorifying the qualities and pastimes of the Supreme Lord.
Their hearts and souls are constantly submerged in Krsna, and they take
pleasure in discussing Him with other devotees.

In the preliminary stage of devotional serVice they relish the



transcendental pleasure from the serVice itself, and in the mature stage they
are actually situated in love of God. Once situated in that transcendental
position, they can relish the highest perfection which is exhibited by the Lord
in His abode. Lord Caitanya likens transcendental devotional serVice to the
sowing of a seed in the heart of the living entity. There are innumerable living
entities traveling throughout the different planets of the universe, and out of
them there are a few who are fortunate enough to meet a pure devotee and get
the chance to understand devotional serVice. This devotional serVice is just
like a seed, and if it is sown in the heart of a living entity, and if he goes on
hearing and chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, that seed fructifies, just as the seed
of a tree fructifies with regular watering. The spiritual plant of devotional
serVice gradually grows and grows until it penetrates the covering of the
material universe and enters into the brahmajyoti effulgence in the spiritual
sky. In the spiritual sky also that plant grows more and more until it reaches
the highest planet, which is called Goloka Vrndavana, the supreme planet of
Krsna. Ultimately, the plant takes shelter under the lotus feet of Krsna and
rests there. Gradually, as a plant grows fruits and flowers, that plant of
devotional serVice also produces fruits, and the watering process in the form of
chanting and hearing goes on. This plant of devotional serVice is fully
described in the Caitanya—caritc‘tmrta (Madhya—lilc‘t, Chapter Nineteen). It is
explained there that when the complete plant takes shelter under the lotus
feet of the Supreme Lord, one becomes fully absorbed in love of God; then he
cannot live even for a moment without being in contact with the Supreme
Lord, just as a fish cannot live without water. In such a state, the devotee
actually attains the transcendental qualities in contact with the Supreme Lord.

The Srimad—Bhagavatam is also full of such narrations about the
relationship between the Supreme Lord and His devotees; therefore the
Srimad-Bhagavatam is very dear to the devotees, as stated in the th‘tgavatam
itself (12.13.18). Srimad—bhagavatam purc‘mam amalam yad vaisnavc‘mc‘tm priyam.
In this narration there is nothing about material activities, economic
development, sense gratification or liberation. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the only
narration in which the transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord and His



devotees is fully described. Thus the realized souls in Krsna consciousness take
continual pleasure in hearing such transcendental literatures, just as a young
boy and girl take pleasure in association.

TEXT 10
WWWWI
Wﬁgﬁz‘rﬁéaﬁmﬁwﬁﬁueou

test‘tm satata—yuktc‘mc‘tm
bhajatc‘tm priti—pmvakam
dadc‘tmi buddhi—yogam tam

yena mam upayc‘mti te

SYNONYMS

tesam—unto them; satata—yuktc‘mc‘tm—always engaged; bhajatc‘tm—in
rendering devotional service; priti-pmvakam—in loving ecstasy; dadc'tmi—I
give; buddhi—yogam—real intelligence; tam—that; yena—by which;
mc‘tm—unto Me; upayc‘mti—come; te—they.

TRANSLATION

To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with love, I give the
understanding by which they can come to Me.

PURPORT

In this verse the word buddhi-yogam is very significant. We may remember
that in the Second Chapter the Lord, instructing Arjuna, said that He had
spoken to him of many things and that He would instruct him in the way of
buddhi-yoga. Now buddhi—yoga is explained. Buddhi—yoga itself is action in
Krsna consciousness; that is the highest intelligence. Buddhi means
intelligence, and yoga means mystic activities or mystic elevation. When one



tries to go back home, back to Godhead, and takes fully to Krsna consciousness
in devotional service, his action is called buddhi yoga. In other words,
buddhi-yoga is the process by which one gets out of the entanglement of this
material world. The ultimate goal of progress is Krsna. People do not know
this; therefore the association of devotees and a bona fide spiritual master are
important. One should know that the goal is Krsna, and when the goal is
assigned, then the path is slowly but progressively traversed, and the ultimate
goal is achieved.

When a person knows the goal of life but is addicted to the fruits of
activities, he is acting in karma-yoga. When he knows that the goal is Krsna
but he takes pleasure in mental speculations to understand Krsna, he is acting
in jﬁc‘ma-yoga. And when he knows the goal and seeks Krsna completely in
Krsna consciousness and devotional service, he is acting in bhakti-yoga, or
buddhi-yoga, which is the complete yoga. This complete yoga is the highest
perfectional stage of life.

A person may have a bona fide spiritual master and may be attached to a
spiritual organization, but still, if he is not intelligent enough to make progress,
then Krsna from within gives him instructions so that he may ultimately come
to Him without difficulty. The qualification is that a person always engage
himself in Krsna consciousness and with love and devotion render all kinds of
services. He should perform some sort of work for Krsna, and that work should
be with love. If a devotee is not intelligent enough to make progress on the
path of self-realization but is sincere and devoted to the activities of
devotional service, the Lord gives him a chance to make progress and
ultimately attain to Him.

TEXT 11

WWWWH
WWWIHM

test‘tm evc‘mukampc‘trtham
aham ajﬁc‘ma-jam tamah



nc‘ts’ayc‘tmy c‘ttma—bhc‘wa—stho
jﬁc‘ma—dipena bhc‘tsvatc‘t

SYNONYMS

tesam—for them; eva—certainly; anukampc‘t—artham—to show special mercy;
aham—I; ajﬁc‘ma—jam—due to ignorance; tamah—darkness; nc‘ts’ayc‘tmi—dispel;
c‘ttma—bhc‘wa—within their hearts; sthah—situated; jﬁc‘ma—of knowledge;
dipena—with the lamp; bhc‘tsvatc‘t—glowing.

TRANSLATION

To show them special mercy, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the
shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.

PURPORT

When Lord Caitanya was in Benares promulgating the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare, thousands of people were following Him. Prakasananda
Sarasvati, a very influential and learned scholar in Benares at that time,
derided Lord Caitanya for being a sentimentalist. Sometimes philosophers
criticize the devotees because they think that most of the devotees are in the
darkness of ignorance and are philosophically naive sentimentalists. Actually
that is not the fact. There are very, very learned scholars who have put
forward the philosophy of devotion. But even if a devotee does not take
advantage of their literatures or of his spiritual master, if he is sincere in his
devotional serVice he is helped by Krsna Himself within his heart. So the
sincere devotee engaged in Krsna consciousness cannot be without knowledge.
The only qualification is that one carry out devotional serVice in full Krsna
consciousness.

The modern philosophers think that without discriminating one cannot
have pure knowledge. For them this answer is given by the Supreme Lord:
those who are engaged in pure devotional service, even though they be



without sufficient education and even without sufficient knowledge of the
Vedic principles, are still helped by the Supreme God, as stated in this verse.

The Lord tells Arjuna that basically there is no possibility of understanding
the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
simply by speculating, for the Supreme Truth is so great that it is not possible
to understand Him or to achieve Him simply by making a mental effort. Man
can go on speculating for several millions of years, and if he is not devoted, if
he is not a lover of the Supreme Truth, he will never understand Krsna, or the
Supreme Truth. Only by devotional serVice is the Supreme Truth, Krsna,
pleased, and by His inconceivable energy He can reveal Himself to the heart of
the pure devotee. The pure devotee always has Krsna within his heart; and
with the presence of Krsna, who is just like the sun, the darkness of ignorance
is at once dissipated. This is the special mercy rendered to the pure devotee by
Krsna.

Due to the contamination of material association, through many, many
millions of births, one’s heart is always covered with the dust of materialism,
but when one engages in devotional serVice and constantly chants Hare Krsna,
the dust quickly clears, and one is elevated to the platform of pure knowledge.
The ultimate goal, Visnu, can be attained only by this chant and by devotional
service, and not by mental speculation or argument. The pure devotee does not
have to worry about the material necessities of life; he need not be anxious,
because when he removes the darkness from his heart, everything is provided
automatically by the Supreme Lord, who is pleased by the loving devotional
serVice of the devotee. This is the essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. By
studying Bhagavad-gitc‘t, one can become a soul completely surrendered to the
Supreme Lord and engage himself in pure devotional serVice. As the Lord
takes charge, one becomes completely free from all kinds of materialistic
endeavors.

TEXTS 12—13

Wain?!
maamumqﬁawaam



Wmaﬁﬁwmﬁﬁaﬁﬁwﬁunu
Wzﬁﬁaﬁﬁﬁmml
ammsamzmﬁaa—oﬁﬁﬁueau

arjuna uvc‘tca
param brahma param dhdma
pavitram paramam bhavc‘m
purusam s’c‘ts’vatam divyam
c‘tdi—devam ajam Uibhum

c‘thus tvc‘tm rsayah sarve

devarsir nc‘tradas tathd
asito devalo vyc‘tsah

svayam caiva bravisi me

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; param—supreme; brahma—truth;
param—supreme; dhc‘tma—sustenance; pavitmm—pure; paramam—supreme;
bhavc‘m—You; purusam—personality; s’c‘ts’vatam—original;
divyam—transcendental; c‘tdi—devam—the original Lord; ajam—unborn;
vibhum—greatest; c‘thuh—say; tvc‘tm—of You; Tsayah—sages; sarve—all;
deva-Tsih—the sage among the demigods; nc‘tradah—Narada; tathc‘t—also;
asitah—Asita; devalah—Devala; vyc‘tsah—Vyasa; svayam—personally;
ca—also; eva—certainly; bravisi—You are explaining; me—unto me.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the ultimate
abode, the purest, the Absolute Truth. You are the eternal, transcendental,
original person, the unborn, the greatest. All the great sages such as Narada,
Asita, Devala and Vyasa confirm this truth about You, and now You Yourself
are declaring it to me.



PURPORT

In these two verses the Supreme Lord gives a chance to the modern
philosopher, for here it is clear that the Supreme is different from the
individual soul. Arjuna, after hearing the essential four verses of Bhagavad-gitc‘t
[BG 108-111 in this chapter, became completely free from all doubts and
accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He at once boldly
declares, “You are param brahma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” And
previously Krsna stated that He is the originator of everything and everyone.
Every demigod and every human being is dependent on Him. Men and
demigods, out of ignorance, think that they are absolute and independent of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That ignorance is removed perfectly by
the discharge of devotional serVice. This has already been explained in the
previous verse by the Lord. Now, by His grace, Arjuna is accepting Him as the
Supreme Truth, in concordance with the Vedic injunction. It is not that
because Krsna is Arjuna’s intimate friend Arjuna is flattering Him by calling
Him the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth. Whatever
Arjuna says in these two verses is confirmed by Vedic truth. Vedic injunctions
affirm that only one who takes to devotional serVice to the Supreme Lord can
understand Him, whereas others cannot. Each and every word of this verse
spoken by Arjuna is confirmed by Vedic injunction.

In the Kena Upam'sad it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is the rest for
everything, and Krsna has already explained that everything is resting on Him.
The Mundaka Upcmisad confirms that the Supreme Lord, in whom everything
is resting, can be realized only by those who engage constantly in thinking of
Him. This constant thinking of Krsna is smaranam, one of the methods of
devotional serVice. It is only by devotional serVice to Krsna that one can
understand his position and get rid of this material body.

In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is accepted as the purest of the pure. One
who understands that Krsna is the purest of the pure can become purified from
all sinful activities. One cannot be disinfected from sinful activities unless he
surrenders unto the Supreme Lord. Arjuna’s acceptance of Krsna as the
supreme pure complies with the injunctions of Vedic literature. This is also



confirmed by great personalities, of whom Narada is the chief.

Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one should always
meditate upon Him and enjoy one’s transcendental relationship with Him. He
is the supreme existence. He is free from bodily needs, birth and death. Not
only does Arjuna confirm this, but all the Vedic literatures, the Purc‘mas and
histories. In all Vedic literatures Krsna is thus described, and the Supreme
Lord Himself also says in the Fourth Chapter, “Although I am unborn, I appear
on this earth to establish religious principles.” He is the supreme origin; He has
no cause, for He is the cause of all causes, and everything is emanating from
Him. This perfect knowledge can be had by the grace of the Supreme Lord.

Here Arjuna expresses himself through the grace of Krsna. If we want to
understand Bhagavad-gitc‘t, we should accept the statements in these two
verses. This is called the paramparc't system, acceptance of the disciplic
succession. Unless one is in the disciplic succession, he cannot understand
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. It is not possible by so-called academic education.
Unfortunately those proud of their academic education, despite so much
evidence in Vedic literatures, stick to their obstinate conviction that Krsna is
an ordinary person.

TEXT 14
WWWWWI
ﬁﬁﬁWﬁQﬁﬁHqueeu

sarvam etad Ttam manye
yam mam vadasi kes’ava

ha hi te bhagcwcm vyaktim
vidur devc‘t ha dc‘mavc‘th

SYNONYMS

sarvam—all; etat—this; Ttam—truth; manye—I accept; yat—which;
mc‘tm—unto me; vadasi—You tell; kes’ava—O Krsna; na—never; hi—certainly;



te—Your; bhagavcm—O Personality of Godhead; vyaktim—revelation;
viduh—can know; devah—the demigods; na—nor; dc‘mavc‘th—the demons.

TRANSLATION

O Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither the
demigods nor the demons, O Lord, can understand Your personality.

PURPORT

Arjuna herein confirms that persons of faithless and demonic nature
cannot understand Krsna. He is not known even by the demigods, so what to
speak of the so-called scholars of this modern world? By the grace of the
Supreme Lord, Arjuna has understood that the Supreme Truth is Krsna and
that He is the perfect one. One should therefore follow the path of Arjuna. He
received the authority of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. As described in the Fourth Chapter,
the paramparc't system of disciplic succession for the understanding of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t was lost, and therefore Krsna reestablished that disciplic
succession with Arjuna because He considered Arjuna His intimate friend and
a great devotee. Therefore, as stated in our Introduction to Gitopanisad,
Bhagavad-gitc‘t should be understood in the paramparc‘t system. When the
paramparc't system was lost, Arjuna was selected to rejuvenate it. The
acceptance by Arjuna of all that Krsna says should be emulated; then we can
understand the essence of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, and then only can we understand
that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 15
WWEIWI
memlmu

svayam evc‘ttmanc‘ttmc‘mam
vettha tvam purusottama
bhﬁta—bhc‘wana bhﬁtes’a



deva-deva jagat—pate

SYNONYMS

svayam—personally; eva—certainly; c‘ttmcmc‘t—by Yourself;
c‘ttmc‘mam—Yourself; vettha—know; tvam—You; purusa—uttama—O greatest of
all persons; bhﬁta-bhavana—O origin of everything; bhﬁta-is’a—O Lord of
everything; deva—deva—O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate—O Lord of the
entire universe.

TRANSLATION

Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own internal potency, 0 Supreme
Person, origin of all, Lord of all beings, God of gods, Lord of the universe!

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord, Krsna, can be known by persons who are in a
relationship with Him through the discharge of devotional service, like Arjuna
and his followers. Persons of demonic or atheistic mentality cannot know
Krsna. Mental speculation that leads one away from the Supreme Lord is a
serious sin, and one who does not know Krsna should not try to comment on
Bhagavad—gitc‘t. Bhagavad-gitc‘t is the statement of Krsna, and since it is the
science of Krsna, it should be understood from Krsna as Arjuna understood it.
It should not be received from atheistic persons.

As stated in grimad-Bbégavatam (1.2.11):

vadcmti tat tattUa—vidas
tattvam yaj jﬁc‘mam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavc‘m iti s’abdyate

The Supreme Truth is realized in three aspects: as impersonal Brahman,
localized Paramatma and at last as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So at
the last stage of understanding the Absolute Truth, one comes to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. A common man or even a liberated man who has



realized impersonal Brahman or localized Paramatma may not understand
God’s personality. Such men, therefore, may endeavor to understand the
Supreme Person from the verses of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, which are being spoken by
this person, Krsna. Sometimes the impersonalists accept Krsna as Bhagavan, or
they accept His authority. Yet many liberated persons cannot understand
Krsna as Purusottama, the Supreme Person. Therefore Arjuna addresses Him
as Purusottama. Yet one still may not understand that Krsna is the father of all
living entities. Therefore Arjuna addresses Him as Bhuta-bhavana. And if one
comes to know Him as the father of all the living entities, still one may not
know Him as the supreme controller; therefore He is addressed here as
Bhutes’a, the supreme controller of everyone. And even if one knows Krsna as
the supreme controller of all living entities, still one may not know that He is
the origin of all the demigods; therefore He is addressed herein as Devadeva,
the worshipful God of all demigods. And even if one knows Him as the
worshipful God of all demigods, one may not know that He is the supreme
proprietor of everything; therefore He is addressed as Jagatpati. Thus the truth
about Krsna is established in this verse by the realization of Arjuna, and we
should follow in the footsteps of Arjuna to understand Krsna as He is.

TEXT 16

WWWWWH
WWWWMWH

vaktum arhasy as’esena
divyc‘t hy c‘ttma—Uibhﬁtayah
yc‘tbhir vibhﬁtibhir lokc‘m

imams tvam vyc‘tpya tisthasi

SYNONYMS

vaktum—to say; arhasi—You deserve; as’esena—in detail; divyc‘th—divine;
hi—certainly; c'ttma—Your own; Uibhﬁtayah—opulences; yc'tbhih—by which;



vibhﬁtibhih—opulences; lokc‘m—all the planets; imc‘m—these; tvam—You;
vyc‘tpya—pervading; tisthasi—remain.

TRANSLATION

Please tell me in detail of Your divine opulences by which You pervade all
these worlds.

PURPORT

In this verse it appears that Arjuna is already satisfied with his
understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. By Krsna’s
grace, Arjuna has personal experience, intelligence and knowledge and
whatever else a person may have through all these agencies, and he has
understood Krsna to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For him there is
no doubt, yet he is asking Krsna to explain His all-pervading nature. People in
general and the impersonalists in particular concern themselves mainly with
the all-pervading nature of the Supreme. 80 Arjuna is asking Krsna how He
exists in His all-pervading aspect through His different energies. One should
know that this is being asked by Arjuna on behalf of the common people.

TEXT 17
Wﬁam'a‘a‘rﬁIiT—oliaﬁzrqﬁﬁlml
hhanﬁgﬁﬁeﬁm‘awuwu

katham vidyc‘tm aham yogims
wam sadc‘t paricintayan
kesu kesu ca bhc‘wesu
cintyo ’si bhagavcm mayc‘t
SYNONYMS

katham—how; vidyc‘tm aham—shall I know; yogin—O supreme mystic;



tvc‘tm—You; sadc‘t—always; paricintayan—thinking of; kesu—in which;
kesu—in which; ca—also; bhc‘wesu—natures; cintyah asi—You are to be
remembered; bhagavcm—O Supreme; maya—by me.

TRANSLATION

O Krsna, O supreme mystic, how shall I constantly think of You, and how
shall I know You? In what various forms are You to be remembered, 0
Supreme Personality of Godhead?

PURPORT

As it is stated in the previous chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is covered by His yoga-mc‘tyc't. Only surrendered souls and devotees can see
Him. Now Arjuna is convinced that His friend, Krsna, is the Supreme
Godhead, but he wants to know the general process by which the all-pervading
Lord can be understood by the common man. Common men, including the
demons and atheists, cannot know Krsna, because He is guarded by His
yoga-mc‘tyc't energy. Again, these questions are asked by Arjuna for their
benefit. The superior devotee is concerned not only for his own understanding
but for the understanding of all mankind. 80 Arjuna, out of his mercy, because
he is a Vaisnava, a devotee, is opening for the common man the understanding
of the all-pervasiveness of the Supreme Lord. He addresses Krsna specifically
as yogin because Sri Krsna is the master of the yoga-mc‘tyc't energy, by which He
is covered and uncovered to the common man. The common man who has no
love for Krsna cannot always think of Krsna; therefore he has to think
materially. Arjuna is considering the mode of thinking of the materialistic
persons of this world. The words kesu kesu ca bhc‘wesu refer to material nature
(the word bhc‘wa means “physical things”). Because materialists cannot
understand Krsna spiritually, they are advised to concentrate the mind on
physical things and try to see how Krsna is manifested by physical
representations.

TEXT 18



WWWHWI
11131: $Wafﬁﬁxluaé’rﬁtfiaﬁsmu F H

vistarenc‘ttmano yogam

vibhﬁtim ca janc‘trdana

bhﬁyah kathaya trptir hi
s’mvato nc‘tsti me ’mrtam

SYNONYMS

vistarena—in detail; c‘ttmanah—Your; yogam—mystic power;
vibhﬁtim—opulences; ca—also; jana—ardana—O killer of the atheists;
bhﬁyah—again; kathaya—describe; trptih—satisfaction; hi—certainly;
s’mvatah—hearing; ha asti—there is not; me—my; amrtam—nectar.

TRANSLATION

O Janardana, again please describe in detail the mystic power of Your
opulences. I am never satiated in hearing about You, for the more I hear the
more I want to taste the nectar of Your words.

PURPORT

A similar statement was made to Suta Gosvami by the Tsis of Naimisaranya,
headed by Saunaka. That statement is:

vayam tu ha vitrpyc‘tma

uttama-s’loka—vikrame
yac chmvatc‘tm rasa—jﬁc‘mc‘tm

svc‘tdu svc‘tdu pade pade

“One can never be satiated even though one continuously hears the
transcendental pastimes of Krsna, who is glorified by excellent prayers. Those
who have entered into a transcendental relationship with Krsna relish at every



step the descriptions of the pastimes of the Lord.” (grimad-Bbégavatam 1.1.19)
Thus Arjuna is interested in hearing about Krsna, and specifically how He
remains as the all-pervading Supreme Lord.

Now as far as amrtam, nectar, is concerned, any narration or statement
concerning Krsna is just like nectar. And this nectar can be perceived by
practical experience. Modern stories, fiction and histories are different from
the transcendental pastimes of the Lord in that one will tire of hearing
mundane stories but one never tires of hearing about Krsna. It is for this
reason only that the history of the whole universe is replete with references to
the pastimes of the incarnations of Godhead. The Purc‘mas are histories of
bygone ages that relate the pastimes of the various incarnations of the Lord. In
this way the reading matter remains forever fresh, despite repeated readings.

TEXT 19

W
mﬁ$aﬁwﬁﬁwmﬁiﬁwl
szésmﬁﬁmﬁumu

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
hanta te kathayisyc‘tmi
divyc‘t hy c‘ttma—Uibhﬁtayah
prc‘tdhc‘myatah kmu—s’restha
nasty cmto vistarasya me

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta—yes;
te—unto you; kathayisyc‘tmi—I shall speak; divyc‘th—divine; hi—certainly;
c‘ttma—Uibhﬁtayah—personal opulences; prc‘tdhc‘myatah—which are principal;
kmu—s’restha—O best of the Kurus; ha asti—there is not; antah—limit;
vistarasya—to the extent; me—My.



TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Yes, I will tell you of My
splendorous manifestations, but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna,
for My opulence is limitless.

PURPORT

It is not possible to comprehend the greatness of Krsna and His opulences.
The senses of the individual soul are limited and do not permit him to
understand the totality of Krsna’s affairs. Still the devotees try to understand
Krsna, but not on the principle that they will be able to understand Krsna fully
at any specific time or in any state of life. Rather, the very topics of Krsna are
so relishable that they appear to the devotees as nectar. Thus the devotees
enjoy them. In discussing Krsna’s opulences and His diverse energies, the pure
devotees take transcendental pleasure. Therefore they want to hear and
discuss them. Krsna knows that living entities do not understand the extent of
His opulences; He therefore agrees to state only the principal manifestations of
His different energies. The word prc‘tdhc‘myatah (“principal”) is very important
because we can understand only a few of the principal details of the Supreme
Lord, for His features are unlimited. It is not possible to understand them all.
And Uibhﬁti, as used in this verse, refers to the opulences by which He controls
the whole manifestation. In the AmaTa-kos’a dictionary it is stated that Uibhﬁti
indicates an exceptional opulence.

The impersonalist or pantheist cannot understand the exceptional
opulences of the Supreme Lord nor the manifestations of His divine energies.
Both in the material world and in the spiritual world His energies are
distributed in every variety of manifestation. Now Krsna is describing what
can be directly perceived by the common man; thus part of His variegated
energy is described in this way.

TEXT 20



WWWH

Wﬂqﬁfﬁ‘ﬁF—WHQHHIIQOII

aham c‘ttmc‘t gudc‘tkes’a
sarva-bhﬁtc‘ts’aya—sthitah
aham c‘tdis’ ca madhyam ca
bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm anta eva ca

SYNONYMS

aham—I; dtmc‘t—the soul; guddkes’a—O Arjuna; sarva-bhﬁta—of all living
entities; c‘ts’aya—sthitah—situated within the heart; aham—I am; c‘tdih—the
origin; ca—also; madhyam—middle; ca—also; bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm—of all living entities;
antah—end; eva—certainly; ca—and.

TRANSLATION

I am the Supersoul, O Arjuna, seated in the hearts of all living entities. I am
the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.

PURPORT

In this verse Arjuna is addressed as Gudakes’a, which means “one who has
conquered the darkness of sleep.” For those who are sleeping in the darkness of
ignorance, it is not possible to understand how the Supreme Personality of
Godhead manifests Himself in various ways in the material and spiritual
worlds. Thus this address by Krsna to Arjuna is significant. Because Arjuna is
above such darkness, the Personality of Godhead agrees to describe His various
opulences.

Krsna first informs Arjuna that He is the soul of the entire cosmic
manifestation by dint of His primary expansion. Before the material creation,
the Supreme Lord, by His plenary expansion, accepts the pumsa incarnations,
and from Him everything begins. Therefore He is c'ttmc't, the soul of the
mahat-tattva, the universal elements. The total material energy is not the cause



of the creation; actually the Maha-Visnu enters into the mahat-tattva, the total
material energy. He is the soul. When Maha-Visnu enters into the manifested
universes, He again manifests Himself as the Supersoul in each and every
entity. We have experience that the personal body of the living entity exists
due to the presence of the spiritual spark. Without the existence of the
spiritual spark, the body cannot develop. Similarly, the material manifestation
cannot develop unless the Supreme Soul, Krsna, enters. As stated in the
Subala Upcmisad, prakrty—c‘tdi-sarva—bhﬁtc‘mtar—yc‘tmi sarva—s’esi ca nc‘trc‘tyanah:
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is existing as the Supersoul in all
manifested universes.”

The three purusa—avatc‘tras are described in Srimad—Bhagavatam. They are
also described in the Sc‘ttvata-tantm. Visnos tu trim' rﬁpc‘mi pumsc‘tkhyc‘my atho
Uiduh: the Supreme Personality of Godhead manifests three features—as
Karanodakas’ayi Visnu, Garbhodakas’ayi Visnu and Ksirodakas’ayi Visnu—in
this material manifestation. The Maha-Visnu, or Karanodakas’ayi Visnu, is
described in the Brabma-san'ilu'ta (5.47). Yah kc‘tranc‘tmava—jale bhajati sma
yoga-nidrc‘tm: the Supreme Lord, Krsna, the cause of all causes, lies down in the
cosmic ocean as Maha-Visnu. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is the beginning of this universe, the maintainer of the universal
manifestations, and the end of all energy.

TEXT 21

WWWWI
WHWWHQ‘III

adityc‘mc‘tm aham visnur

jyotisc‘tm ravir ams’umc‘m
memoir marutc‘tm asmi

naksatrc‘mc‘tm aham s’as’i

SYNONYMS



c‘tdityc‘mc‘tm—of the Adityas; aham—I am; Visnuh—the Supreme Lord;
jyotisc‘tm—of all luminaries; ravih—the sun; ams’u—mc‘m—radiant;
maricih—Marici; marutc‘tm—of the Maruts; asmi—I am; naksatrc‘mc‘tm—of the
stars; aham—I am; s’as’i—the moon.

TRANSLATION

Of the Adityas I am Visnu, of lights I am the radiant sun, of the Maruts I
am Marici, and among the stars I am the moon.

PURPORT

There are twelve Adityas, of which Krsna is the principal. Among all the
luminaries twinkling in the sky, the sun is the chief, and in the
Brahma-samhitc't the sun is accepted as the glowing eye of the Supreme Lord.
There are fifty varieties of wind blowing in space, and of these winds the
controlling deity, Marici, represents Krsna.

Among the stars, the moon is the most prominent at night, and thus the
moon represents Krsna. It appears from this verse that the moon is one of the
stars; therefore the stars that twinkle in the sky also reflect the light of the
sun. The theory that there are many suns within the universe is not accepted
by Vedic literature. The sun is one, and as by the reflection of the sun the
moon illuminates, so also do the stars. Since Bhagavad-gitc‘t indicates herein
that the moon is one of the stars, the twinkling stars are not suns but are
similar to the moon.

TEXT 22

WWSI‘EHWWH
WWWWWMQH

vedc‘mc‘tm sc‘tma-vedo ’smi
devc‘mc‘tm asmi vc‘tsavah
indriyc‘mc‘tm mamas” cc‘tsmi



bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm asmi cetcmc‘t

SYNONYMS

vedc‘mc‘tm—of all the Vedas; sc‘tma—Uedah—the Sc‘tma Veda; asmi—I am;
devanam—of all the demigods; asmi—I am; vc‘tsavah—the heavenly king;
indriyc‘mc‘tm—of all the senses; manah—the mind; ca—also; asmi—I am;
bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm—of all living entities; asmi—I am; cetcmc‘t—the living force.

TRANSLATION
Of the Vedas I am the Sama Veda; of the demigods I am Indra, the king of

heaven; of the senses I am the mind; and in living beings I am the living force
[consciousness].

PURPORT

The difference between matter and spirit is that matter has no
consciousness like the living entity; therefore this consciousness is supreme
and eternal. Consciousness cannot be produced by a combination of matter.

TEXT 23

W matte: WHRWI
EIEEIT’ maﬁa ﬁF: 8mm" Q3 ||

rudrc‘mc‘tm s’ahkaras’ cc‘tsmi
vittes’o yaksa-raksasdm
vasﬁndm pc‘wakas’ cc‘tsmi
meruh s’ikharindm aham

SYNONYMS

rudrc‘mc‘tm—of all the Rudras; s’ahkarah—Lord Siva; ca—also; asmi—I am;
vitta—is’ah—the lord of the treasury of the demigods; yaksa—raksasc‘tm—of the



Yaksas and Raksasas; vasﬁm‘tm—of the Vasus; pc‘wakah—fire; ca—also; asmi—I
am; meruh—Meru; s’ikharinc‘tm—of all mountains; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION
Of all the Rudras I am Lord Siva, of the Yaksas and Raksasas I am the Lord

of wealth [Kuvera], of the Vasus I am fire [Agni], and of mountains I am Meru.

PURPORT

There are eleven Rudras, of whom Sankara, Lord Siva, is predominant. He
is the incarnation of the Supreme Lord in charge of the mode of ignorance in
the universe. The leader of the Yaksas and Raksasas is Kuvera, the master
treasurer of the demigods, and he is a representation of the Supreme Lord.
Meru is a mountain famed for its rich natural resources.

TEXT 24

Wagainiﬁrﬁgmefwﬁm

Elﬁzzamnféqw ||Q8||

purodhasc‘tm ca mukhyam mam
viddhi pc‘trtha brhaspatim
sem‘mim‘tm aham skcmdah
sarasc‘tm asmi sc‘tgarah

SYNONYMS

purodhasc‘tm—of all priests; ca—also; mukhyam—the chief; mc‘tm—Me;
Uiddhi—understand; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; brhaspatim—Brhaspati;
senc‘minc‘tm—of all commanders; aham—I am; skandah—Kartikeya;
sarasc‘tm—of all reservoirs of water; asmi—I am; sc‘tgarah—the ocean.

TRANSLATION



Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Brhaspati. Of generals I am
Kartikeya, and of bodies of water I am the ocean.

PURPORT

Indra is the chief demigod of the heavenly planets and is known as the king
of the heavens. The planet on which he reigns is called Indraloka. Brhaspati is
Indra’s priest, and since Indra is the chief of all kings, Brhaspati is the chief of
all priests. And as Indra is the chief of all kings, similarly Skanda, or Kartikeya,
the son of Parvati and Lord Siva, is the chief of all military commanders. And
of all bodies of water, the ocean is the greatest. These representations of Krsna
only give hints of His greatness.

TEXT 25
HEW 11312? WWI
mWﬁWW: || ax ||

maharsinc‘tm bhrgm aham

girt‘tm asmy ekam aksaram

yajﬁc‘mc‘tm japa—yajﬁo ’smi
sthc‘warc‘mc‘tm himc‘tlayah

SYNONYMS

mahc‘t—Tsinc‘tm—among the great sages; bhrguh—Bhrgu; aham—I am; girt‘tm—of
Vibrations; asmi—I am; ekam aksaram—pranava; yajﬁc‘mc‘tm—of sacrifices;
japa—yajﬁah—chanting; asmi—I am; sthc‘warc‘mc‘tm—of immovable things;
himc‘tlayah—the Himalayan mountains.

TRANSLATION

Of the great sages I am Bhrgu; of Vibrations I am the transcendental om. Of
sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and of immovable things I



am the Himalayas.

PURPORT

Brahma, the first living creature within the universe, created several sons
for the propagation of various kinds of species. Among these sons, Bhrgu is the
most powerful sage. Of all the transcendental Vibrations, the om (omkc'tm)
represents Krsna. Of all sacrifices, the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare is
the purest representation of Krsna. Sometimes animal sacrifices are
recommended, but in the sacrifice of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, there is no
question of Violence. It is the simplest and the purest. Whatever is sublime in
the worlds is a representation of Krsna. Therefore the Himalayas, the greatest
mountains in the world, also represent Him. The mountain named Meru was
mentioned in a previous verse, but Meru is sometimes movable, whereas the
Himalayas are never movable. Thus the Himalayas are greater than Meru.

TEXT 26

Staamaiqméaﬁﬁamu
maafurrﬁlaw:f$@=naﬁfﬁeﬁﬁﬁzuqau

as’vatthah sarva—vrksc‘mc‘tm
devarsinc‘tm ca nc‘tradah

gandharvc‘mc‘tm citramthah
siddhc‘mc‘tm kapilo munih

SYNONYMS

as’vatthah—the banyan tree; sarva—vrksc‘mc‘tm—of all trees; deva—Tsinc‘tm—of all
the sages amongst the demigods; ca—and; nc‘tradah—Narada;
gandharvc‘mc‘tm—of the citizens of the Gandharva planet;
citrarathah—Citraratha; siddhanc‘tm—of all those who are perfected; kapilah
mum'h—Kapila Muni.



TRANSLATION

Of all trees I am the banyan tree, and of the sages among the demigods I am
Narada. Of the Gandharvas I am Citraratha, and among perfected beings I am
the sage Kapila.

PURPORT

The banyan tree (as’vattha) is one of the highest and most beautiful trees,
and people in India often worship it as one of their daily morning rituals.
Amongst the demigods they also worship Narada, who is considered the
greatest devotee in the universe. Thus he is the representation of Krsna as a
devotee. The Gandharva planet is filled with entities who sing beautifully, and
among them the best singer is Citraratha. Amongst the perfect living entities,
Kapila, the son of Devahuti, is a representative of Krsna. He is considered an
incarnation of Krsna, and His philosophy is mentioned in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. Later on another Kapila became famous, but his
philosophy was atheistic. Thus there is a gulf of difference between them.

TEXT 27

ﬁzwmﬁﬁmmml
WWWHWH ?\9 ||

uccaihs’ravasam as’vc‘mc‘tm
viddhi mam amrtodbhavam

airc‘watam gajendrc‘mc‘tm

naranc‘tm ca naradhipam

SYNONYMS

uccaihs’ravasam—Uccaihs’rava; as’vc‘mc‘tm—among horses; Uiddhi—know;
mc‘tm—Me; amrta—udbhavam—produced from the churning of the ocean;



airc‘watam—Airavata; gaja—indrc‘mc‘tm—of lordly elephants; naranc‘tm—among
human beings; ca—and; nara-adhipam—the king.

TRANSLATION

Of horses know Me to be Uccaihs’rava, produced during the churning of the
ocean for nectar. Of lordly elephants I am Airavata, and among men I am the
monarch.

PURPORT

The devotee demigods and the demons (asmas) once took part in churning
the sea. From this churning, nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Siva
drank the poison. From the nectar were produced many entities, of which
there was a horse named Uccaihs’rava. Another animal produced from the
nectar was an elephant named Airavata. Because these two animals were
produced from nectar, they have special significance, and they are
representatives of Krsna.

Amongst the human beings, the king is the representative of Krsna because
Krsna is the maintainer of the universe, and the kings, who are appointed on
account of their godly qualifications, are maintainers of their kingdoms. Kings
like Maharaja Yudhisthira, Maharaja Pariksit and Lord Rama were all highly
righteous kings who always thought of the citizens’ welfare. In Vedic literature,
the king is considered to be the representative of God. In this age, however,
with the corruption of the principles of religion, monarchy decayed and is now
finally abolished. It is to be understood that in the past, however, people were
more happy under righteous kings.

TEXT 28

WWWWI
marlinamﬁmcrfvnnﬁqangﬁﬁz || Q= ||

c‘tyudhc‘mc‘tm aham vajram



dhemlnc‘tm asmi kc‘tmadhuk
prajanas’ cc‘tsmi kandarpah
sarpc‘mc‘tm asmi vc‘tsukih

SYNONYMS

c‘tyudhc‘mc‘tm—of all weapons; aham—I am; vajram—the thunderbolt;
dhenﬁnc‘tm—of cows; asmi—I am; kc‘tma—dhuk—the surabhi cow; prajcmah—the
cause for begetting children; ca—and; asmi—I am; kandarpah—Cupid;
sarpc‘mc‘tm—of serpents; asmi—I am; vdsukih—Vasuki.

TRANSLATION

Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi. Of causes
for procreation I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and of serpents I am Vasuki.

PURPORT

The thunderbolt, indeed a mighty weapon, represents Krsna’s power. In
Krsnaloka in the spiritual sky there are cows which can be milked at any time,
and they give as much milk as one likes. Of course such cows do not exist in
this material world, but there is mention of them in Krsnaloka. The Lord keeps
many such cows, which are called surabhi. It is stated that the Lord is engaged
in herding the surabhi cows. Kandarpa is the sex desire for presenting good
sons; therefore Kandarpa is the representative of Krsna. Sometimes sex is
engaged in only for sense gratification; such sex does not represent Krsna. But
sex for the generation of good children is called Kandarpa and represents
Krsna.

TEXT 29

WWWWWI
ﬁavnntfmaﬁcrmzmmmlmu



ancmtas’ cc‘tsmi ndgc‘mc‘tm
varuno yddasc‘tm aham
pitfnc‘tm aryamc‘t cc‘tsmi
yamah samyamatc‘tm aham

SYNONYMS

ammtah—Ananta; ca—also; asmi—I am; nc‘tgc‘mc‘tm—of the many-hooded
serpents; vamnah—the demigod controlling the water; yt‘tdasc‘tm—of all
aquatics; aham—I am; pitfnc‘tm—of the ancestors; aryamc‘t—Aryama; ca—also;
asmi—I am; yamah—the controller of death; samyamatc‘tm—of all regulators;
aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Of the many-hooded Nagas I am Ananta, and among the aquatics I am the
demigod Varuna. Of departed ancestors I am Aryama, and among the dispensers
of law I am Yama, the lord of death.

PURPORT

Among the many-hooded Naga serpents, Ananta is the greatest, as is the
demigod Varuna among the aquatics. They both represent Krsna. There is also
a planet of Pitas, ancestors, presided over by Aryama, who represents Krsna.
There are many living entities who give punishment to the miscreants, and
among them Yama is the chief. Yama is situated in a planet near this earthly
planet. After death those who are very sinful are taken there, and Yama
arranges different kinds of punishments for them.

TEXT 30

mmmmzml
113W HWSE‘ 333M trfavntru 3o ||



prahlc‘tdas’ cc‘tsmi daityc‘mc‘tm
kalah kalayatc‘tm aham

mrgc‘mc‘tm ca mrgendro ’ham
vainateyas’ ca paksinc‘tm

SYNONYMS

prahlc‘tdah—Prahlada; ca—also; asmi—I am; daityc‘mc‘tm—of the demons;
kalah—time; kalayatc‘tm—of subduers; aham—I am; mrgc‘mc‘tm—of animals;
ca—and; nga-mdrah—the lion; aham—I am; vainateyah—Garuda; ca—also;
paksinc‘tm—of birds.

TRANSLATION

Among the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlada, among subduers I am
time, among beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuda.

PURPORT

Diti and Aditi are two sisters. The sons of Aditi are called Adityas, and the
sons of Diti are called Daityas. All the Adityas are devotees of the Lord, and
all the Daityas are atheistic. Although Prahlada was born in the family of the
Daityas, he was a great devotee from his childhood. Because of his devotional
serVice and godly nature, he is considered to be a representative of Krsna.

There are many subduing principles, but time wears down all things in the
material universe and so represents Krsna. Of the many animals, the lion is the
most powerful and ferocious, and of the million varieties of birds, Garuda, the
bearer of Lord Visnu, is the greatest.

TEXT 31

W2Wm2WI
memﬁqmuseu



pavcmah pavatc‘tm asmi
rc‘tmah s’astra-bhrtc‘tm aham
jhasc‘mc‘tm makaras’ cc‘tsmi
srotasc‘tm asmi jc‘thnavi

SYNONYMS

pavcmah—the wind; pavatc‘tm—of all that purifies; asmi—I am; rc‘tmah—Rama;
s’astra-bhrtc‘tm—of the carriers of weapons; aham—I am; jhasc‘mc‘tm—of all fish;
makarah—the shark; ca—also; asmi—I am; srotasc‘tm—of ﬂowing rivers;
asmi—I am; jc‘thnavi—the River Ganges.

TRANSLATION
Of purifiers I am the wind, of the wielders of weapons I am Rama, of fishes I

am the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.

PURPORT

Of all the aquatics the shark is one of the biggest and is certainly the most
dangerous to man. Thus the shark represents Krsna.

TEXT 32

Warmﬁamjﬁl
WWW:WII3QM

sargc‘mc‘tm c‘tdir antas’ ca
madhyam caivc‘tham arjuna
adhyc‘ttma—vidyc‘t vidyc‘mc‘tm

vc‘tdah pravadatc‘tm aham

SYNONYMS

sargc‘mc‘tm—of all creations; c‘tdih—the beginning; antah—end; ca—and;



madhyam—middle; ca—also; eva—certainly; aham—I am; arjuna—O Arjuna;
adhyc‘ttma—Uidyc‘t—spiritual knowledge; vidyc‘mc‘tm—of all education; vc‘tdah—the
natural conclusion; pmvadatc'tm—of arguments; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, 0
Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, and among
logicians I am the conclusive truth.

PURPORT

Among the created manifestations, the first is the creation of the total
material elements. As explained before, the cosmic manifestation is created
and conducted by Maha-Visnu, Garbhodakas’ayi Visnu and Ksirodakas’ayi
Visnu, and then again it is annihilated by Lord Siva. Brahma is a secondary
creator. All these agents of creation, maintenance and annihilation are
incarnations of the material qualities of the Supreme Lord. Therefore He is
the beginning, the middle and the end of all creation.

For advanced education there are various kinds of books of knowledge, such
as the four Vedas, their siX supplements, the Vedc'mta-sﬁtm, books of logic,
books of religiosity and the Purc‘mas. So all together there are fourteen
divisions of books of education. Of these, the book which presents
adhyc'ttma-Uidyc't, spiritual knowledge—in particular, the
Vedc‘mta—sﬁtra—represents Krsna.

Among logicians there are different kinds of argument. Supporting one’s
argument with evidence that also supports the opposing side is called jalpa.
Merely trying to defeat one’s opponent is called Uitandc't. But the actual
conclusion is called vc'tda. This conclusive truth is a representation of Krsna.

TEXT 33

astécr E: Wan



318mm: m uﬁra‘ 8%: || 33 ||

aksarc‘mc‘tm a—kc‘tro ’smi
dvcmdvah sc‘tmc‘tsikasya ca
aham evc‘tksayah kalo
dhc‘ttc‘tham vis’vato—mukhah

SYNONYMS

aksarc‘mc‘tm—of letters; a-kc‘trah—the first letter; asmi—I am; dvandvah—the
dual; sc‘tmc‘tsikasya—of compounds; ca—and; aham—I am; eva—certainly;
aksayah—eternal; kalah—time; dhc‘ttc‘t—the creator; aham—I am;
vis’vatah—mukhah—Brahma.

TRANSLATION

Of letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual
compound. I am also inexhaustible time, and of creators I am Brahma.

PURPORT

A-kc‘n‘a, the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, is the beginning of the
Vedic literature. Without a-kc‘tm, nothing can be sounded; therefore it is the
beginning of sound. In Sanskrit there are also many compound words, of which
the dual word, like rc‘tma—krsna, is called dvcmdva. In this compound, the words
75mm and krsna have the same form, and therefore the compound is called
dual.

Among all kinds of killers, time is the ultimate because time kills
everything. Time is the representative of Krsna because in due course of time
there will be a great fire and everything will be annihilated.

Among the living entities who are creators, Brahma, who has four heads, is
the chief. Therefore he is a representative of the Supreme Lord, Krsna.

TEXT 34



ﬁzaaiswaﬁgaaqﬁmtu
ﬁzaﬁaﬁam‘hﬁaﬁﬁwqﬁrwmuseu

mrtyuh sarva—haras’ cc‘tham
udbhavas’ ca bhavisyatc‘tm
kirtih s’rir vc‘tk ca nc‘trinc‘tm
smrtir medhc‘t dhrtih ksamc‘t

SYNONYMS

mrtyuh—death; sarva—harah—all-devouring; ca—also; aham—I am;
udbhavah—generation; ca—also; bhavisyatc‘tm—of future manifestations;
kirtih—fame; s’rih—opulence or beauty; vc'tk—fine speech; ca—also;
nc‘trinc‘tm—of women; smrtih—memory; medhc‘t—intelligence;
dhrtih—firmness; ksamc‘t—patience.

TRANSLATION

I am all-devouring death, and I am the generating principle of all that is yet
to be. Among women I am fame, fortune, fine speech, memory, intelligence,
steadfastness and patience.

PURPORT

As soon as a man is born, he dies at every moment. Thus death is devouring
every living entity at every moment, but the last stroke is called death itself.
That death is Krsna. As for future development, all living entities undergo siX
basic changes. They are born, they grow, they remain for some time, they
reproduce, they dwindle, and finally they vanish. Of these changes, the first is
deliverance from the womb, and that is Krsna. The first generation is the
beginning of all future activities.

The seven opulences listed—fame, fortune, fine speech, memory,
intelligence, steadfastness and patience—are considered feminine. If a person



possesses all of them or some of them he becomes glorious. If a man is famous
as a righteous man, that makes him glorious. Sanskrit is a perfect language and
is therefore very glorious. If after studying one can remember a subject matter,
he is gifted with a good memory, or smrti. And the ability not only to read
many books on different subject matters but to understand them and apply
them when necessary is intelligence (medhc‘t), another opulence. The ability to
overcome unsteadiness is called firmness or steadfastness (dhrti). And when
one is fully qualified yet is humble and gentle, and when one is able to keep his
balance both in sorrow and in the ecstasy of joy, he has the opulence called
patience (ksamc‘t).

TEXT 35

WWWWWI

0

InaFn trn‘rsﬂﬁfssﬁi WW: || 3% ||

brhat-sc‘tma tathd sc‘tmnc‘tm
gc‘tyatri chandasdm aham
mc‘tsc‘mc‘tm mc‘trga—s’irso ’ham
Tranam kusumc‘tkarah

SYNONYMS

brhat—sc‘tma—the Brhat—sc‘tma; tathc‘t—also; sc‘tmm‘tm—of the 85mm Veda songs;
gc‘tyatri—the Gayatri hymns; chandasc‘tm—of all poetry; aham—I am;
mc‘tsc‘mc‘tm—of months; mc‘trga—s’irsah—the month of November-December;
aham—I am; Ttﬁnc‘tm—of all seasons; kusuma—c‘tkarah—spring.

TRANSLATION

Of the hymns in the Sama Veda I am the Brhat-sama, and of poetry I am the
Gayatri. Of months I am Margasirsa [November-December], and of seasons I
am flower-bearing spring.



PURPORT

It has already been explained by the Lord that amongst all the Vedas, He is
the 85mm Veda. The Sama Veda is rich with beautiful songs played by the
various demigods. One of these songs is the Brhat-sc'tma, which has an exquisite
melody and is sung at midnight.

In Sanskrit, there are definite rules that regulate poetry; rhyme and meter
are not written whimsically, as in much modern poetry. Amongst the regulated
poetry, the Gayatri mantra, which is chanted by the duly qualified brc‘thmanas,
is the most prominent. The Gayatri mantra is mentioned in the
Srimad—Bhagavatam. Because the Gayatri mantra is especially meant for God
realization, it represents the Supreme Lord. This mantra is meant for
spiritually advanced people, and when one attains success in chanting it, he
can enter into the transcendental position of the Lord. One must first acquire
the qualities of the perfectly situated person, the qualities of goodness
according to the laws of material nature, in order to chant the Gayatri mantra.
The Gayatri mantra is very important in Vedic civilization and is considered
to be the sound incarnation of Brahman. Brahma is its initiator, and it is
passed down from him in disciplic succession.

The month of November-December is considered the best of all months
because in India grains are collected from the fields at this time and the people
become very happy. Of course spring is a season universally liked because it is
neither too hot nor too cold and the flowers and trees blossom and flourish. In
spring there are also many ceremonies commemorating Krsna’s pastimes;
therefore this is considered to be the most joyful of all seasons, and it is the
representative of the Supreme Lord, Krsna.

TEXT 36

aﬁmﬁqﬁaﬁml
SRﬁSqu maﬁa E?oi ar—olaamattu as H



dyﬁtam chalayatc‘tm asmi
tejas tejasvinc‘tm aham
jayo ’smi vyavasc‘tyo ’smi
sattvam sattvavatc‘tm aham

SYNONYMS

dyﬁtam—gambling; chalayatc‘tm—of all cheats; asmi—I am; tejah—the
splendor; tejasvinc‘tm—of everything splendid; aham—I am; jayah—Victory;
asmi—I am; vyavasc‘tyah—enterprise or adventure; asmi—I am; sattvam—the
strength; sattva—vatc‘tm—of the strong; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the splendor. I am
Victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of the strong.

PURPORT

There are many kinds of cheaters all over the universe. Of all cheating
processes, gambling stands supreme and therefore represents Krsna. As the
Supreme, Krsna can be more deceitful than any mere man. If Krsna chooses to
deceive a person, no one can surpass Him in His deceit. His greatness is not
simply one-sided—it is all-sided.

Among the Victorious, He is Victory. He is the splendor of the splendid.
Among the enterprising and industrious, He is the most enterprising, the most
industrious. Among adventurers He is the most adventurous, and among the
strong He is the strongest. When Krsna was present on earth, no one could
surpass Him in strength. Even in His childhood He lifted Govardhana Hill. No
one can surpass Him in cheating, no one can surpass Him in splendor, no one
can surpass Him in Victory, no one can surpass Him in enterprise, and no one
can surpass Him in strength.

TEXT 37



WWSQHWWH
szﬁﬁﬁmﬁulswu

vrsninc‘tm vc‘tsudevo ’smi
pc‘mdavc‘mc‘tm dhanaﬁjayah
muninc‘tm apy aham vyc‘tsah
kavim‘tm us’cmc‘t kavih

SYNONYMS

vrsnim‘tm—of the descendants of Vrsni; vc‘tsudevah—Krsna in Dvaraka;
asmi—I am; pc‘mdavc‘mc‘tm—of the Pandavas; dhanaﬁjayah—Arjuna;
munim‘tm—of the sages; api—also; aham—I am; vyc‘tsah—Vyasa, the compiler
of all Vedic literature; kavim‘tm—of all great thinkers; us’am't—Us’ana;
kavih—the thinker.

TRANSLATION

Of the descendants of Vrsni I am Vasudeva, and of the Pandavas I am
Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyasa, and among great thinkers I am Us’ana.

PURPORT

Krsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Baladeva is
Krsna’s immediate expansion. Both Lord Krsna and Baladeva appeared as sons
of Vasudeva, so both of Them may be called Vasudeva. From another point of
View, because Krsna never leaves Vrndavana, all the forms of Krsna that
appear elsewhere are His expansions. Vasudeva is Krsna’s immediate
expansion, so Vasudeva is not different from Krsna. It is to be understood that
the Vasudeva referred to in this verse of Bhagavad-gitc‘t is Baladeva, or
Balarama, because He is the original source of all incarnations and thus He is
the sole source of Vasudeva. The immediate expansions of the Lord are called
svc‘tms’a (personal expansions), and there are also expansions called
Uibhinm'tms’a (separated expansions).



Amongst the sons of Pandu, Arjuna is famous as Dhanaﬁjaya. He is the best
of men and therefore represents Krsna. Among the mum's, or learned men
conversant in Vedic knowledge, Vyasa is the greatest because he explained
Vedic knowledge in many different ways for the understanding of the common
mass of people in this Age of Kali. And Vyasa is also known as an incarnation
of Krsna; therefore Vyasa also represents Krsna. Kavis are those who are
capable of thinking thoroughly on any subject matter. Among the kavis,
Us’ana, Sukracarya, was the spiritual master of the demons; he was an
extremely intelligent and far-seeing politician. Thus Sukracarya is another
representative of the opulence of Krsna.

TEXT 38

Wmﬁqa‘lﬁlﬁqﬁnﬁwl
ﬁmﬂamaﬁmuaw

dando damayatc‘tm asmi
nitir asmi jigisatc‘tm
maunam caivc‘tsmi guhyc‘mc‘tm
jﬁc‘mam jﬁc‘mavatc‘tm aham

SYNONYMS

dandah—punishment; damayatc‘tm—of all means of suppression; asmi—I am;
nitih—morality; asmi—I am; jigisatc'tm—of those who seek Victory;
maunam—silence; ca—and; eva—also; asmi—I am; guhyc‘mc‘tm—of secrets;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; jﬁc‘ma—vatc‘tm—of the wise; aham—I am.

TRANSLATION

Among all means of suppressing lawlessness I am punishment, and of those
who seek Victory I am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise I
am the wisdom.



PURPORT

There are many suppressing agents, of which the most important are those
that cut down miscreants. When miscreants are punished, the agency of
chastisement represents Krsna. Among those who are trying to be Victorious in
some field of activity, the most Victorious element is morality. Among the
confidential activities of hearing, thinking and meditating, silence is most
important because by silence one can make progress very quickly. The wise
man is he who can discriminate between matter and spirit, between God’s
superior and inferior natures. Such knowledge is Krsna Himself.

TEXT 39

wﬁaéiﬁmia‘lsfaaﬂﬁﬁl
ﬁaaﬁaﬁmwmwﬁmussu

yac cc‘tpi sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm
bijam tad aham arjuna

ha tad asti vinc‘t yat syc‘m

mayc‘t bhﬁtam cardcaram

SYNONYMS

yat—whatever; ca—also; api—may be; sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm—of all creations;
bijam—seed; tat—that; aham—I am; arjuna—O Arjuna; na—not; tat—that;
asti—there is; Uma—without; yat—which; syc‘tt—exists; maya—Me;
bhﬁtam—created being; cara—acaram—moving and nonmoving.

TRANSLATION

Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences. There is
no being—moving or nonmoving—that can exist without Me.



PURPORT

Everything has a cause, and that cause or seed of manifestation is Krsna.
Without Krsna’s energy, nothing can exist; therefore He is called omnipotent.
Without His potency, neither the movable nor the immovable can exist.
Whatever existence is not founded on the energy of Krsna is called mc‘tyc't,
“that which is not.”

TEXT 40

ﬁstiannﬁaﬁiﬁifﬁﬁimm
maﬁaazmaﬁﬁiﬁﬁaﬁwueou

nc‘mto ’sti mama divyc‘mc‘tm
vibhﬁtindm parantapa
esa tﬁddes’atah prokto
vibhﬁter vistaro mayc‘t

SYNONYMS

na—nor; antah—a limit; asti—there is; mama—My; divyc‘mc‘tm—of the divine;
vibhﬁtim‘tm—opulences; parantapa—O conqueror of the enemies; esah—all
this; tu—but; uddes’atah—as examples; proktah—spoken; vibhﬁteh—of
opulences; vistarah—the expanse; maya—by Me.

TRANSLATION

O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine manifestations.
What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication of My infinite opulences.

PURPORT

As stated in the Vedic literature, although the opulences and energies of



the Supreme are understood in various ways, there is no limit to such
opulences; therefore not all the opulences and energies can be explained.
Simply a few examples are being described to Arjuna to pacify his
inquisitiveness.

TEXT 41

WWWI
Watanﬁa‘réwmuee ||

yad yad vibhﬁtimat sattvam
s’rimad mjitam eva vc‘t
tat tad evc‘wagaccha tvam
mama tejo—’ms’a—sambhavam

SYNONYMS

yat yat—whatever; Uibhﬁti—opulences; mat—having; sattvam—existence;
s’ri-mat—beautiful; mjitam—glorious; eva—certainly; vc‘t—or; tat tat—all
those; eva—certainly; avagaccha—must know; tvam—you; mama—My;
tejah—of the splendor; ams’a—a part; sambhavam—born of.

TRANSLATION

Know that all opulent, beautiful and glorious creations spring from but a
spark of My splendor.

PURPORT

Any glorious or beautiful existence should be understood to be but a
fragmental manifestation of Krsna’s opulence, whether it be in the spiritual or
material world. Anything extraordinarily opulent should be considered to
represent Krsna’s opulence.



TEXT 42

awaﬁﬁﬁﬁaﬁﬁaaﬁm
WWWWH8QH

atha vc‘t bahunaitena

kim jﬁc‘ttena tavc‘trjuna
vistabhyc‘tham idam krtsnam

ekc‘tms’ena sthito jagat

SYNONYMS

atha vc‘t—or; bahunc‘t—many; etena—by this kind; kim—what; jﬁc‘ttena—by
knowing; tava—your; arjuna—O Arjuna; vistabhya—pervading; aham—I;
idam—this; krtsnam—entire; eka—by one; ams’ena—part; sthitah—am
situated; jagat—universe.

TRANSLATION

But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord is represented throughout the entire material universes
by His entering into all things as the Supersoul. The Lord here tells Arjuna
that there is no point in understanding how things exist in their separate
opulence and grandeur. He should know that all things are existing due to
Krsna’s entering them as Supersoul. From Brahma, the most gigantic entity, on
down to the smallest ant, all are existing because the Lord has entered each
and all and is sustaining them.

There is a Mission that regularly propounds that worship of any demigod
will lead one to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, or the supreme goal. But
worship of demigods is thoroughly discouraged herein because even the



greatest demigods like Brahma and Siva represent only part of the opulence of
the Supreme Lord. He is the origin of everyone born, and no one is greater
than Him. He is asamamdhva, which means that no one is superior to Him and
that no one is equal to Him. In the Padma Purc‘ma it is said that one who
considers the Supreme Lord Krsna in the same category with demigods—be
they even Brahma or Siva—becomes at once an atheist. If, however, one
thoroughly studies the different descriptions of the opulences and expansions
of Krsna’s energy, then one can understand without any doubt the position of
Lord Sri Krsna and can fix his mind in the worship of Krsna without
deviation. The Lord is all-pervading by the expansion of His partial
representation, the Supersoul, who enters into everything that is. Pure
devotees, therefore, concentrate their minds in Krsna consciousness in full
devotional service; therefore they are always situated in the transcendental
position. Devotional serVice and worship of Krsna are very clearly indicated in
this chapter in verses eight through eleven. That is the way of pure devotional
serVice. How one can attain the highest devotional perfection of association
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead has been thoroughly explained in
this chapter. Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana, a great c'tcc'n‘ya in disciplic
succession from Krsna, concludes his commentary on this chapter by saying,

yac—chakti—les’c‘tt suryc‘tdyc‘t
bhavcmty aty-ugra—tejasah
yad—ams’ena dhrtam vis’vam
sa krsno das’ame ’rcyate

From Lord Krsna’s potent energy even the powerful sun gets its power, and
by Krsna’s partial expansion the whole world is maintained. Therefore Lord
Sri Krsna is worshipable.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Tenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Opulence of the Absolute.



The Universal Form

 

ammﬁlﬁﬁfﬁvﬁmueu

arjuna uvc‘tca
mad—anugrahc‘tya paramam
guhyam adhyc‘ttma-samjﬁitam
yat tvayoktam vacas tena
moho ’yam vigato mama

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; mat—anugrahc‘tya—just to show me favor;
paramam—supreme; guhyam—confidential subject; adhyc‘ttma—spiritual;
samjﬁitam—in the matter of; yat—what; tvayc‘t—by You; uktam—said;
vacah—words; tena—by that; mohah—illusion; ayam—this; vigatah—is
removed; mama—my.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: By my hearing the instructions You have kindly given me about
these most confidential spiritual subjects, my illusion has now been dispelled.

PURPORT



This chapter reveals Krsna as the cause of all causes. He is even the cause of
the Maha-Visnu, from whom the material universes emanate. Krsna is not an
incarnation; He is the source of all incarnations. That has been completely
explained in the last chapter.

Now, as far as Arjuna is concerned, he says that his illusion is over. This
means that Arjuna no longer thinks of Krsna as a mere human being, as a
friend of his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is very enlightened and is
glad that he has such a great friend as Krsna, but now he is thinking that
although he may accept Krsna as the source of everything, others may not. So
in order to establish Krsna’s divinity for all, he is requesting Krsna in this
chapter to show His universal form. Actually when one sees the universal form
of Krsna one becomes frightened, like Arjuna, but Krsna is so kind that after
showing it He converts Himself again into His original form. Arjuna agrees to
what Krsna has several times said: Krsna is speaking to him just for his benefit.
80 Arjuna acknowledges that all this is happening to him by Krsna’s grace. He
is now convinced that Krsna is the cause of all causes and is present in
everyone’s heart as the Supersoul.

TEXT 2

Wﬁwﬁmaﬁ‘WWI
mzmatnamnfﬁmuqu

bhavc‘tpyayau hi bhmanam
s’rutau vistaras’o mayc‘t
tvattah kamala—patrc‘tksa
mc‘thc‘ttmyam api cc‘wyayam

SYNONYMS

bhaUa—appearance; apyayau—disappearance; hi—certainly; bhﬁtc'mc'tm—of all
living entities; s’rutau—have been heard; vistaras’ah—in detail; maya—by me;
tvattah—from You; kamala—patra—aksa—O lotus-eyed one;



mc‘thc‘ttmyam—glories; api—also; ca—and; avyayam—inexhaustible.

TRANSLATION

O lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance and
disappearance of every living entity and have realized Your inexhaustible
glories.

PURPORT

Arjuna addresses Lord Krsna as “lotus-eyed” (Krsna’s eyes appear just like
the petals of a lotus flower) out of his joy, for Krsna has assured him, in the
previous chapter, aham krtsnasya jagatah prabhavah pralayas tathc‘t: “I am the
source of the appearance and disappearance of this entire material
manifestation.” Arjuna has heard of this from the Lord in detail. Arjuna
further knows that in spite of His being the source of all appearances and
disappearances, He is aloof from them. As the Lord has said in the Ninth
Chapter, He is all-pervading, yet He is not personally present everywhere.
That is the inconceivable opulence of Krsna which Arjuna admits that he has
thoroughly understood.

TEXT 3

WWWQﬁQEI
mﬁﬁﬁaﬁmuau

evam etad yathc‘tttha tvam
c‘ttmc‘mam parames’vara

drastum icchc‘tmi te rﬁpam
ais’varam purusottama

SYNONYMS
evam—thus; etat—this; yathc‘t—as it is; c‘tttha—have spoken; tvam—You;



c‘ttmc‘mam—Yourself; parama-is’vara—O Supreme Lord; drastum—to see;
icchc‘tmi—I wish; te—Your; rﬁpam—form; ais’varam—divine;
purusa—uttama—O best of personalities.

TRANSLATION

O greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see You here before
me in Your actual position, as You have described Yourself, I wish to see how
You have entered into this cosmic manifestation. I want to see that form of
Yours.

PURPORT

The Lord said that because He entered into the material universe by His
personal representation, the cosmic manifestation has been made possible and
is going on. Now as far as Arjuna is concerned, he is inspired by the statements
of Krsna, but in order to convince others in the future who may think that
Krsna is an ordinary person, Arjuna desires to see Him actually in His
universal form, to see how He is acting from within the universe, although He
is apart from it. Arjuna’s addressing the Lord as pumsottama is also significant.
Since the Lord is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He is present within
Arjuna himself; therefore He knows the desire of Arjuna, and He can
understand that Arjuna has no special desire to see Him in His universal form,
for Arjuna is completely satisfied to see Him in His personal form of Krsna.
But the Lord can understand also that Arjuna wants to see the universal form
to convince others. Arjuna did not have any personal desire for confirmation.
Krsna also understands that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to set a
criterion, for in the future there would be so many imposters who would pose
themselves as incarnations of God. The people, therefore, should be careful;
one who claims to be Krsna should be prepared to show his universal form to
confirm his claim to the people.

TEXT 4



Wﬁmwagﬁrﬁrmﬁl
ﬁﬁazaa‘rﬁc—oiaﬁqmmwuau

manyase yadi tac chakyam
mayc‘t drastum iti prabho
yoges’vara tato me tvam

dars’ayc‘ttmc‘mam avyayam

SYNONYMS

manyase—You think; yadi—if; tat—that; s’akyam—is able; maya—by me;
drastum—to be seen; iti—thus; prabho—O Lord; yoga-is’vara—O Lord of all
mystic power; tatah—then; me—unto me; tvam—You; dars’aya—show;
c‘ttmc‘mam—Your Self; avyayam—eternal.

TRANSLATION
If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, 0 my Lord, 0

master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that unlimited universal Self.

PURPORT

It is said that one can neither see, hear, understand nor perceive the
Supreme Lord, Krsna, by the material senses. But if one is engaged in loving
transcendental serVice to the Lord from the beginning, then one can see the
Lord by revelation. Every living entity is only a spiritual spark; therefore it is
not possible to see or to understand the Supreme Lord. Arjuna, as a devotee,
does not depend on his speculative strength; rather, he admits his limitations
as a living entity and acknowledges Krsna’s inestimable position. Arjuna could
understand that for a living entity it is not possible to understand the
unlimited infinite. If the infinite reveals Himself, then it is possible to
understand the nature of the infinite by the grace of the infinite. The word
yoges’vara is also very significant here because the Lord has inconceivable
power. If He likes, He can reveal Himself by His grace, although He is



unlimited. Therefore Arjuna pleads for the inconceivable grace of Krsna. He
does not give Krsna orders. Krsna is not obliged to reveal Himself unless one
surrenders fully in Krsna consciousness and engages in devotional serVice.
Thus it is not possible for persons who depend on the strength of their mental
speculations to see Krsna.

TEXT 5

W
Wﬁ‘mafwfﬁmasﬁsaamu
WWWHMH

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
pas’ya me pc‘trtha rﬁpc‘mi
s’atas’o ’tha sahasras’ah
m‘mc‘t-vidhc‘mi divyc‘mi
nc‘mc‘t-vamc‘tkrtmi ca

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pas’ya—just
see; me—My; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; rﬁpc‘mi—forms; s’atas’ah—hundreds;
atha—also; sahasras’ah—thousands; nc‘mc‘t—vidhc‘mi—variegated;
divydni—divine; nc‘mc‘t—variegated; vama—colors; dkrtini—forms; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, 0 son of Prtha,
see now My opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine and multicolored
forms.

PURPORT

Arjuna wanted to see Krsna in His universal form, which, although a



transcendental form, is just manifested for the cosmic manifestation and is
therefore subject to the temporary time of this material nature. As the
material nature is manifested and not manifested, similarly this universal form
of Krsna is manifested and nonmanifested. It is not eternally situated in the
spiritual sky like Krsna’s other forms. As far as a devotee is concerned, he is
not eager to see the universal form, but because Arjuna wanted to see Krsna in
this way, Krsna reveals this form. This universal form is not possible to be seen
by any ordinary man. Krsna must give one the power to see it.

TEXT 6

WWI

WWW
WWWWMH

pas’yc‘tdityc‘m vasﬁn rudrc‘m
as’vinau marutas tathd
bahﬁny adrsta-pmvc‘mi
pas’yc‘ts’caryc‘mi bhc‘trata

SYNONYMS

pas’ya—see; c‘tdityc‘m—the twelve sons of Aditi; vasﬁn—the eight Vasus;
rudrc‘m—the eleven forms of Rudra; as’vinau—the two As’vinis; marutah—the
forty-nine Maruts (demigods of the wind); tathc't—also; bahﬁni—many;
adrsta—that you have not seen; pﬁrvc‘mi—before; pas’ya—see; c‘ts’caryc‘mi—all
the wonders; bhc‘tmta—O best of the Bharatas.

TRANSLATION

0 best of the Bharatas, see here the different manifestations of Adityas,
Vasus, Rudras, As’Vini-kumaras and all the other demigods. Behold the many
wonderful things which no one has ever seen or heard of before.

PURPORT



Even though Arjuna was a personal friend of Krsna and the most advanced
of learned men, it was still not possible for him to know everything about
Krsna. Here it is stated that humans have neither heard nor known of all these
forms and manifestations. Now Krsna reveals these wonderful forms.

TEXT 7
WWWWI
maﬁﬂaﬁmﬁmueu

ihaika—stham jagat krtsnam
pas’yc‘tdya sa—carc‘tcaram
mama dehe guddkes’a
yac cc‘myad drastum icchasi

SYNONYMS

iha—in this; eka—stham—in one place; jagat—the universe;
krtsnam—completely; pas’ya—see; adya—immediately; sa—with; cara—the
moving; acaram—and not moving; mama—My; dehe—in this body;
guddkes’a—O Arjuna; yat—that which; ca—also; anyat—other; drastum—to
see; icchasi—you wish.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, whatever you wish to see, behold at once in this body of Mine!
This universal form can show you whatever you now desire to see and whatever
you may want to see in the future. Everything—moving and nonmoving—is
here completely, in one place.

PURPORT

No one can see the entire universe while sitting in one place. Even the
most advanced scientist cannot see what is going on in other parts of the



universe. But a devotee like Arjuna can see everything that exists in any part
of the universe. Krsna gives him the power to see anything he wants to see,
past, present and future. Thus by the mercy of Krsna, Arjuna is able to see
everything.

TEXT 8

qqniaaaﬁagnﬁﬁamaﬂl
wmﬁmywﬁﬁmﬁamuw

ha tu mam s’akyase drastum
cmenaiva sva—caksusc‘t
divyam dadc‘tmi te caksuh
pas’ya me yogam ais’varam

SYNONYMS

na—never; tu—but; mc‘tm—Me; s’akyase—are able; drastum—to see;
cmena—with these; eva—certainly; sva—caksusc‘t—your own eyes;
divyam—divine; dadc‘tmi—I give; te—to you; caksuh—eyes; pas’ya—see;
me—My; yogam ais’varam—inconceivable mystic power.

TRANSLATION
But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you divine

eyes. Behold My mystic opulence!

PURPORT

A pure devotee does not like to see Krsna in any form except His form with
two hands; a devotee must see His universal form by His grace, not with the
mind but with spiritual eyes. To see the universal form of Krsna, Arjuna is told
not to change his mind but his Vision. The universal form of Krsna is not very
important; that will be clear in subsequent verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted



to see it, the Lord gives him the particular Vision required to see that universal
form.

Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationship with
Krsna are attracted by loving features, not by a godless display of opulences.
The playmates of Krsna, the friends of Krsna and the parents of Krsna never
want Krsna to show His opulences. They are so immersed in pure love that
they do not even know that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In
their loving exchange they forget that Krsna is the Supreme Lord. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that the boys who play with Krsna are all highly
pious souls and after many, many births they are able to play with Krsna. Such
boys do not know that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They
take Him as a personal friend. Therefore Sukadeva Gosvami recites this verse:

ittham satc‘tm brahma-sukhc‘mubhﬁtyc‘t
dc‘tsyam gatc‘mc‘tm para—daivatena
mc‘tyc‘ts’ritc‘mc‘tm nara-dt‘tmkena
sc‘tkam vijahruh krta—punya—puﬁjc‘th

“Here is the Supreme Person, who is considered the impersonal Brahman by
great sages, the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotees, and a product of
material nature by ordinary men. Now these boys, who have performed many,
many pious activities in their past lives, are playing with that Supreme
Personality of Godhead.” (grimad-Bbégavatam 10.12.11)

The fact is that the devotee is not concerned with seeing the Uis’va-Tﬁpa, the
universal form, but Arjuna wanted to see it to substantiate Krsna’s statements
so that in the future people could understand that Krsna not only theoretically
or philosophically presented Himself as the Supreme but actually presented
Himself as such to Arjuna. Arjuna must confirm this because Arjuna is the
beginning of the paramparc't system. Those who are actually interested in
understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and who follow in
the footsteps of Arjuna should understand that Krsna not only theoretically
presented Himself as the Supreme, but actually revealed Himself as the
Supreme.

The Lord gave Arjuna the necessary power to see His universal form



because He knew that Arjuna did not particularly want to see it, as we have
already explained.

TEXT 9

mm
maﬁmﬁﬁaﬁaﬁzl
Wma‘ramﬁmﬁamusu

saﬁjaya uvc‘tca
evam uktvc‘t tato rc‘tjcm
mahc‘t—yoges’varo harih
dars’ayc‘tm c‘tsa pc‘trthc‘tya
paramam rﬁpam ais’varam

SYNONYMS

saﬁjayah uvc‘tca—Saﬁjaya said; evam—thus; uktvd—saying; tatah—thereafter;
rc‘tjcm—O King; mahc‘t-yoga—is’varah—the most powerful mystic; harih—the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; dars’ayc'tm c'tsa—showed;
pc‘trthc‘tya—unto Arjuna; paramam—the divine; rﬁpam ais’varam—universal
form.

TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said: 0 King, having spoken thus, the Supreme Lord of all mystic
power, the Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal form to Arjuna.

TEXTS 10—11



Hafadmi ﬂame am" 99 ||

aneka-vaktra-nayanam
anekc‘tdbhuta—dars’anam
aneka—divyc‘tbharanam
divyc‘mekodyatc‘tyudham

divya—mc‘tlyc‘tmbara-dharam
divya-gandhc‘mulepanam

sarvc‘ts’carya—mayam devam
cmantam vis’vato—mukham

SYNONYMS

cmeka—various; vaktra—mouths; nayanam—eyes; cmeka—various;
adbhuta—wonderful; dars’anam—sights; aneka—many; divya—divine;
c‘tbharanam—ornaments; divya—divine; cmeka—various; udyata—uplifted;
c‘tyudham—weapons; divya—divine; mc‘tlya—garlands; ambara—dresses;
dharam—wearing; divya—divine; gandha—fragrances; anulepanam—smeared
with; sarva—all; c‘ts’carya—mayam—wonderful; devam—shining;
anantam—unlimited; vis’vatah—mukham—all-pervading.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths, unlimited eyes,
unlimited wonderful Visions. The form was decorated with many celestial
ornaments and bore many divine upraised weapons. He wore celestial garlands
and garments, and many divine scents were smeared over His body. All was
wondrous, brilliant, unlimited, all-eXpanding.

PURPORT

In these two verses the repeated use of the word many indicates that there
was no limit to the number of hands, mouths, legs and other manifestations
Arjuna was seeing. These manifestations were distributed throughout the



universe, but by the grace of the Lord, Arjuna could see them while sitting in
one place. That was due to the inconceivable potency of Krsna.

TEXT 12

WWWI
aﬁmzaqsﬁmmlgmnamzuwu

divi sﬁrya—sahasrasya
bhaved yugapad utthitc‘t
yadi bhc‘th sadrs’i $67 syc‘td

bhc‘tsas tasya mahc‘ttmanah

SYNONYMS

divi—in the sky; sﬁrya—of suns; sahasrasya—of many thousands;
bhavet—there were; yugapat—simultaneously; utthitc‘t—present; yadi—if;
bhc‘th—light; sadrs’i—like that; sc‘t—that; syc‘tt—might be; bhc‘tsah—effulgence;
tasya—of Him; mahc‘t—c‘ttmanah—the great Lord.

TRANSLATION

If hundreds of thousands of suns were to rise at once into the sky, their
radiance might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal
form.

PURPORT

What Arjuna saw was indescribable, yet Saﬁjaya is trying to give a mental
picture of that great revelation to Dhrtarastra. Neither Saﬁjaya nor
Dhrtarastra was present, but Saﬁjaya, by the grace of Vyasa, could see
whatever happened. Thus he now compares the situation, as far as it can be
understood, to an imaginable phenomenon (i.e., thousands of suns).



TEXT 13

Elm swlcogcel' WTI'JHDIOVQT I
aim :R‘i? WW II 93 u

tatraika—stham jagat krtsnam
pravibhaktam cmekadhc‘t
apas’yad deva-devasya
s’arire pc‘mdavas tadc‘t

 

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; eka—stham—in one place; jagat—the universe;
krtsnam—complete; pravibhaktam—divided; anekadhc‘t—into many;
apas’yat—could see; deva—devasya—of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
s’arire—in the universal form; pc‘mdavah—Arjuna; tada—at that time.

TRANSLATION

At that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the
unlimited expansions of the universe situated in one place although divided into
many, many thousands.

PURPORT

The word tatm (“there”) is very significant. It indicates that both Arjuna
and Krsna were sitting on the chariot when Arjuna saw the universal form.
Others on the battlefield could not see this form, because Krsna gave the
Vision only to Arjuna. Arjuna could see in the body of Krsna many thousands
of planets. As we learn from Vedic scriptures, there are many universes and
many planets. Some of them are made of earth, some are made of gold, some
are made of jewels, some are very great, some are not so great, etc. Sitting on
his chariot, Arjuna could see all these. But no one could understand what was
going on between Arjuna and Krsna.



TEXT 14

aazaﬁmﬁﬁgeﬁmmzl
Wmaaimﬁmmuwu

tatah sa vismayc‘wisto
hrsta—romc‘t dhanaﬁjayah
pranamya s’irasc‘t devam
krtc‘tﬁjalir abhc‘tsata

SYNONYMS

tatah—thereafter; sah—he; vismaya—c‘wistah—being overwhelmed with
wonder; hrsta-romc‘t—with his bodily hairs standing on end due to his great
ecstasy; dhanaﬁjayah—Arjuna; pranamya—offering obeisances; s’irasc‘t—with
the head; devam—to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krta-aﬁjalih—with
folded hands; abhc‘tsata—began to speak.

TRANSLATION

Then, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna bowed

his head to offer obeisances and with folded hands began to pray to the Supreme
Lord.

PURPORT

Once the divine Vision is revealed, the relationship between Krsna and
Arjuna changes immediately. Before, Krsna and Arjuna had a relationship
based on friendship, but here, after the revelation, Arjuna is offering
obeisances with great respect, and with folded hands he is praying to Krsna.
He is praising the universal form. Thus Arjuna’s relationship becomes one of
wonder rather than friendship. Great devotees see Krsna as the reservoir of all
relationships. In the scriptures there are twelve basic kinds of relationships



mentioned, and all of them are present in Krsna. It is said that He is the ocean
of all the relationships exchanged between two living entities, between the
gods, or between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.

Here Arjuna was inspired by the relationship of wonder, and in that
wonder, although he was by nature very sober, calm and quiet, he became
ecstatic, his hair stood up, and he began to offer his obeisances unto the
Supreme Lord with folded hands. He was not, of course, afraid. He was
affected by the wonders of the Supreme Lord. The immediate context is
wonder; his natural loving friendship was overwhelmed by wonder, and thus
he reacted in this way.

TEXT 15

313133313
mamaaae
WWWI
WW-

Wamfamaﬁaﬁuwu

arjuna uvc‘tca
pas’yc‘tmi devams tava deva dehe
sarvc‘tms tathd bhﬁta-vis’esa-sahghc‘m
brahmc‘mam is’am kamaldsana-stham
Tsims’ ca sarvc‘m magc‘tms’ ca divyc‘m

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; pas’yc‘tmi—I see; devc‘m—all the demigods;
tava—Your; deva—O Lord; dehe—in the body; sarvc‘m—all; tathc‘t—also;
bhﬁta—living entities; vis’esa—sahghc‘m—specifically assembled;
brahmc‘mam—Lord Brahma; is’am—Lord Siva; kamala—c‘tscma—stham—sitting on
the lotus ﬂower; rsin—great sages; ca—also; sarvc‘m—all; uragc‘m—serpents;
ca—also; divyc‘m—divine.



TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: My dear Lord Krsna, I see assembled in Your body all the
demigods and various other living entities. I see Brahma sitting on the lotus
flower, as well as Lord Siva and all the sages and divine serpents.

PURPORT

Arjuna sees everything in the universe; therefore he sees Brahma, who is
the first creature in the universe, and the celestial serpent upon which the
Garbhodakas’ayi Visnu lies in the lower regions of the universe. This snake bed
is called Vasuki. There are also other snakes known as Vasuki. Arjuna can see
from the Garbhodakas’ayi Visnu up to the topmost part of the universe on the
lotus-flower planet where Brahma, the first creature of the universe, resides.
That means that from the beginning to the end, everything could be seen by
Arjuna, who was sitting in one place on his chariot. This was possible by the
grace of the Supreme Lord, Krsna.

TEXT 16
ﬂ . ﬂ.
Wataala‘rsml
Wanda '
WEI 853%]? ﬁrm u 9& ||

aneka—bc‘thﬁdara—Uaktra—netmm
pas’yc‘tmi wam sarvato ’nanta—rﬁpam
nc‘mtam ha madhyam ha punas tavc‘tdim
pas’yc‘tmi vis’ves’vara Uis’va—rﬁpa

SYNONYMS

aneka—many; bc‘thu—arms; udara—bellies; vaktra—mouths; netram—eyes;



pas’yc‘tmi—I see; tvc‘tm—You; sarvatah—on all sides; ananta-rﬁpam—unlimited
form; ha antam—no end; ha madhyam—no middle; ha punah—nor again;
tava—Your; c‘tdim—beginning; pas’yc‘tmi—I see; vis’va—is’vara—O Lord of the
universe; Uis’va-Tﬁpa—in the form of the universe.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of the universe, 0 universal form, I see in Your body many, many
arms, bellies, mouths and eyes, expanded everywhere, without limit. I see in
You no end, no middle and no beginning.

PURPORT

Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unlimited; thus
through Him everything could be seen.

TEXT 17
W WW 3
Waﬁﬁml
Wat gﬁﬁei anat—
ﬁmﬁmll 99 u

kiritinam gadinam cakrinam ca

tejo—rc‘ts’im sarvato diptimantam
pas’yc‘tmi wam dumiriksyam samantc‘td

diptc‘malc‘trka—dyutim aprameyam

SYNONYMS

kiritinam—with helmets; gadmam—with maces; cakrinam—with discs;
ca—and; tejah—rc‘ts’im—effulgence; sarvatah—on all sides;
dipti—mantam—glowing; pas’yc‘tmi—I see; tvc‘tm—You; dumiriksyam—difficult
to see; samantc‘tt—everywhere; dipta-anala—blazing fire; arka—of the sun;



dyutim—the sunshine; aprameyam—immeasurable.

TRANSLATION

Your form is difficult to see because of its glaring effulgence, spreading on all
sides, like blazing fire or the immeasurable radiance of the sun. Yet I see this
glowing form everywhere, adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs.

TEXT 18
Wﬁwwﬁwl
Wz‘inaaaﬁvﬁm

WWHHWMFII

tvam aksaram paramam veditavyam

tvam asya vis’vasya param nidhc‘mam

tvam avyayah s’c‘ts’vata—dharma—goptc‘t
sanc'ttanas tvam puruso mato me

SYNONYMS

tvam—You; aksaram—the infallible; paramam—supreme; veditavyam—to be
understood; tvam—You; asya—of this; vis’vasya—universe; param—supreme;
nidhc‘mam—basis; tvam—You; avyayah—inexhaustible;
s’c‘ts’vata—dharma-goptc‘t—maintainer of the eternal religion; sanc‘ttanah—eternal;
tvam—You; purusah—the Supreme Personality; matah me—this is my opinion.

TRANSLATION

You are the supreme primal objective. You are the ultimate resting place of
all this universe. You are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest. You are the
maintainer of the eternal religion, the Personality of Godhead. This is my

opinion.



TEXT 19

WW. _
":“E'a'gﬁ'lgﬂﬁila'h
WEI at W

mam Bath? W" 99 ||

anc‘tdi—madhyc‘mtam ananta—viryam
ananta—bc‘thum s’as’i-smya—netram

pas’yc‘tmi wam dipta—hutc‘ts’a—vaktram
sva—tejasd vis’vam idam tapcmtam

SYNONYMS

anc‘tdi—without beginning; madhya—middle; antam—or end;
ammta—unlimited; viryam—glories; ammta—unlimited; bc‘thum—arms;
s’as’i—the moon; sﬁrya—and sun; netram—eyes; pas’yc‘tmi—I see; tvc‘tm—You;
dipta—blazing; hutc‘ts’a—Uaktram—fire coming out of Your mouth;
sva—tejasc‘t—by Your radiance; vis’vam—universe; idam—this;
tapantam—heating.

TRANSLATION

You are without origin, middle or end. Your glory is unlimited. You have
numberless arms, and the sun and moon are Your eyes. I see You with blazing
fire coming forth from Your mouth, burning this entire universe by Your own
radiance.

PURPORT

There is no limit to the extent of the siX opulences of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Here and in many other places there is repetition, but
according to the scriptures, repetition of the glories of Krsna is not a literary



weakness. It is said that at a time of bewilderment or wonder or of great
ecstasy, statements are repeated over and over. That is not a flaw.

TEXT 20
WE
mWﬁ’aaaale
WWW

WWWIIQM

dyc‘w d-prthivyor idam antaram hi
vyc‘tptam tvayaikena dis’as’ ca sarvc‘th
drstvc‘tdbhutam rﬁpam ugram tavedam
loka—trayam pravyathitam mahc‘ttman

SYNONYMS

dyau—from outer space; c‘t—prthivyoh—to the earth; idam—this;
antaram—between; hi—certainly; vyc‘tptam—pervaded; tvayc‘t—by You;
ekena—alone; dis’ah—directions; ca—and; sarvc‘th—all; drstvc‘t—by seeing;
adbhutam—wonderful; rﬁpam—form; ugram—terrible; tava—Your;
idam—this; loka—the planetary systems; trayam—three;
pravyathitam—perturbed; mahc‘t—c‘ttman—O great one.

TRANSLATION

Although You are one, You spread throughout the sky and the planets and
all space between. 0 great one, seeing this wondrous and terrible form, all the
planetary systems are perturbed.

PURPORT

Dyc‘w c‘t—prthivyoh (“the space between heaven and earth”) and loka-trayam
(“the three worlds”) are significant words in this verse because it appears that



not only did Arjuna see this universal form of the Lord, but others in other
planetary systems saw it also. Arjuna’s seeing of the universal form was not a
dream. All whom the Lord endowed with divine Vision saw that universal form
on the battlefield.

TEXT 21

anteafwﬁaﬁl

W:WUPTR=H

WW
Qaﬁaafaﬁrﬁr W IIQ‘HI

ami hi wam sura—sahghd vis’cmti
kecid bhitc‘th prc‘tﬁjalayo gmcmti
svastity uktvc‘t maharsi—siddha—sahghc‘th
stuvanti wam stutibhih puskalc‘tbhih

SYNONYMS

ami—all those; hi—certainly; tvc‘tm—You; sura—sahghc‘th—groups of demigods;
Uis’anti—are entering; kecit—some of them; bhitc‘th—out of fear;
prc‘tﬁjalayah—with folded hands; gmanti—are offering prayers; svasti—all
peace; iti—thus; uktvc‘t—speaking; mahc‘t-Tsi—great sages;
siddha—sahghc‘th—perfect beings; stuvcmti—are singing hymns; tvdm—unto
You; stutibhih—with prayers; puskalc‘tbhih—Vedic hymns.

TRANSLATION

All the hosts of demigods are surrendering before You and entering into
You. Some of them, very much afraid, are offering prayers with folded hands.
Hosts of great sages and perfected beings, crying “All peace!” are praying to
You by singing the Vedic hymns.



PURPORT

The demigods in all the planetary systems feared the terrific manifestation
of the universal form and its glaring effulgence and so prayed for protection.

TEXT 22

mmaam
ﬁﬁdﬁmmﬁwal
WW
a‘iairaiﬁféqmﬁaaélmu

mdrc‘tdityc‘t vasavo ye ca sc‘tdhyc‘t
vis’ve ’s’vinau marutas’ cosmapc‘ts’ ca
gandharva—yaksc‘tsma—siddha—sahghc‘t
vikscmte wam vismitc‘ts’ caiva sarve

SYNONYMS

rudra—manifestations of Lord Siva; ddityc‘th—the Adityas; vasavah—the
Vasus; ye—all those; ca—and; sc‘tdhyc‘th—the Sadhyas; vis’ve—the Vis’vedevas;
as’vinau—the As’vini-kumaras; marutah—the Maruts; ca—and; usma—pc‘th—the
forefathers; ca—and; gandharva—of the Gandharvas; yaksa—the Yaksas;
asura—the demons; siddha—and the perfected demigods; sahghc‘th—the
assemblies; Uikscmte—are beholding; tvc‘tm—You; vismitc‘th—in wonder;
ca—also; eva—certainly; sarve—all.

TRANSLATION

All the various manifestations of Lord Siva, the Adityas, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Visvedevas, the two Asvis, the Maruts, the forefathers, the
Gandharvas, the Yaksas, the Asuras and the perfected demigods are beholding
You in wonder.



TEXT 23
"6‘7 143% agaaﬁa‘
9 o 0 I
aw W
Eggr W: Wm" 93 ||

rﬁpam mahat te bahu—vaktra—netram
mahc‘t-bc‘tho bahu-bc‘thmu—pc‘tdam

bahﬁdaram bahu-damstrc‘t—karc‘tlam

drstvc‘t lokc‘th pravyathitc‘ts tathc‘tham

SYNONYMS

rﬁpam—the form; mahat—very great; te—of You; bahu—many; vaktra—faces;
netram—and eyes; mahc‘t—bc‘tho—O mighty-armed one; bahu—many;
bc‘thu—arms; ﬁru—thighs; padam—and legs; bahu—udaram—many bellies;
bahu—damstrc‘t—many teeth; kart‘tlam—horrible; drstvc‘t—seeing; lokc‘th—all the
planets; pravyathitc‘th—perturbed; tathc‘t—similarly; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed at
seeing Your great form, with its many faces, eyes, arms, thighs, legs, and bellies
and Your many terrible teeth; and as they are disturbed, so am I.

TEXT 24
$9:an
WWI
egrfﬁc—oli WWW



qﬁfﬁﬁlﬁﬁaﬁaﬁwﬁuqeu

nabhah—sprs’am diptam aneka—vamam
vyc‘tttc‘manam dipta—vis’c‘tla—netram
drstvc‘t hi wam pravyathitc‘mtar—c‘ttmc‘t
dhrtim ha Uindc‘tmi s’amam ca visno

SYNONYMS

nabhah-sprs’am—touching the sky; diptam—glowing; aneka—many;
vamam—colors; vyc‘ttta—open; c‘manam—mouths; dipta—glowing;
vis’c‘tla—very great; netram—eyes; drstvc‘t—seeing; hi—certainly; tvc‘tm—You;
pravyathita—perturbed; antah—within; c‘ttmc‘t—soul; dhrtim—steadiness;
na—not; vindc‘tmi—I have; s’amam—mental tranquillity; ca—also; visno—O

Lord Visnu.

TRANSLATION

O all-pervading Visnu, seeing You with Your many radiant colors touching
the sky, Your gaping mouths, and Your great glowing eyes, my mind is
perturbed by fear. I can no longer maintain my steadiness or equilibrium of
mind.

TEXT 25
Waﬁwﬁ
@ammﬁnﬁl

Wawaaﬁamﬁ
mmmlmau

damstrc‘t—karc‘tlc‘mi ca te mukhc‘mi
drstvaiva kalanala—sannibhc‘mi
dis’o ha jc‘me ha labhe ca s’arma



prasida deves’a jagan-nivc‘tsa

SYNONYMS

damstrc‘t—teeth; kart‘tlc‘mi—terrible; ca—also; te—Your; mukhc‘mi—faces;
drstvc‘t—seeing; eva—thus; kala—anala—the fire of death; sannibhc‘mi—as if;
dis’ah—the directions; na—not; jc‘me—I know; na—not; labhe—I obtain;
ca—and; s’arma—grace; prasida—be pleased; deva—is’a—O Lord of all lords;
jagat-nivc‘tsa—O refuge of the worlds.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I cannot
keep my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces and awful teeth. In all
directions I am bewildered.

TEXTS 26—27

Waaiwramw Haaéanaﬁqwsaé‘l
mam Wmmwawa nae"
mammﬁamﬁwﬁl

WWWWHIQBH

ami ca wam dhrtarc‘tstrasya putrc‘th
sarve sahaivc‘wani—pc‘tla—sahghaih

bhismo dronah sﬁta—putras tathc‘tsau

sahc‘tsmadiyair api yodha—mukhyaih

vaktrc‘mi te tvaramc‘mc‘t vis’cmti
damstrc‘t—kardlc‘mi bhayc‘makc‘mi
kecid vilagm‘t das’am‘mtaresu
sandrs’yante cﬁmitair uttamc‘mgaih



SYNONYMS

ami—these; ca—also; tvc‘tm—You; dhrtarc‘tstrasya—of Dhrtarastra;
putrc‘th—the sons; sarve—all; saha—with; eva—indeed; avani—pc‘tla—of warrior
kings; sahghaih—the groups; bhismah—Bhismadeva; dronah—Dronacarya;
sﬁta—putrah—Karna; tathc‘t—also; asau—that; saha—with; asmadiyaih—our;
api—also; yodha—mukhyaih—chiefs among the warriors; vaktrc‘mi—mouths;
te—Your; tvaramc‘mc‘th—rushing; vis’anti—are entering; damstrc‘t—teeth;
kart‘tlc‘mi—terrible; bhayc‘makc‘mi—very fearful; kecit—some of them;
vilagm‘th—becoming attached; das’ana-antaresu—between the teeth;
sandrs’yante—are seen; cﬁmitaih—with smashed; uttama—ahgaih—heads.

TRANSLATION

All the sons of Dhrtarastra, along with their allied kings, and Bhisma,
Drona, Karna—and our chief soldiers also—are rushing into Your fearful
mouths. And some I see trapped with heads smashed between Your teeth.

PURPORT

In a previous verse the Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would be
very interested in seeing. Now Arjuna sees that the leaders of the opposite
party (Bhisma, Drona, Karna and all the sons of Dhrtarastra) and their soldiers
and Arjuna’s own soldiers are all being annihilated. This is an indication that
after the death of nearly all the persons assembled at Kuruksetra, Arjuna will
emerge Victorious. It is also mentioned here that Bhisma, who is supposed to be
unconquerable, will also be smashed. So also Karna. Not only will the great
warriors of the other party like Bhisma be smashed, but some of the great
warriors of Arjuna’s side also.

TEXT 28

qmqaﬁqfaaﬁslﬁajﬁzaﬂﬁaaﬁ'ﬁﬁfﬂaﬁﬁl



awaaﬁwﬁaaﬂzrﬁaﬁrwﬁrﬁmﬁwwu

yathc‘t nadindm bahavo ’mbu—vegc‘th
samudram evc‘tbhimukhc‘t dravanti
tathd tavc‘tmi nara—loka—virc‘t
vis’cmti vaktrc‘my abhivijvalanti

SYNONYMS

yathc‘t—as; nadim‘tm—of the rivers; bahavah—the many; ambu—vegc‘th—waves
of the waters; samudram—the ocean; eva—certainly; abhimukhc‘th—towards;
dravcmti—glide; tathc‘t—similarly; tava—Your; ami—all these;
nara—loka—virc‘th—kings of human society; vis’anti—are entering; vaktrc‘mi—the
mouths; abhivijvalanti—and are blazing.

TRANSLATION

As the many waves of the rivers flow into the ocean, so do all these great

warriors enter blazing into Your mouths.

TEXT 29

wna’iﬁaﬁwﬁaﬁwwaﬁml
H&HWWW—mﬁwﬁrmzuqqu

yathc‘t pradiptam jvalanam patahgc‘t
vis’cmti nds’c‘tya samrddha—vegc‘th
tathaiva nds’c‘tya vis’cmti lokc‘ts
tavc‘tpi vaktrc‘mi samrddha—vegc‘th

SYNONYMS

yathc‘t—as; pradiptam—blazing; jvalcmam—a fire; patahgc‘th—moths;
vis’anti—enter; nc‘ts’c‘tya—for destruction; samrddha—with full; vege‘th—speed;



tathd eva—similarly; nc‘ts’c‘tya—for destruction; vis’anti—are entering;
lokc‘th—all people; tava—Your; api—also; vaktrc‘mi—mouths;
samrddha-vegc‘th—with full speed.

TRANSLATION

I see all people rushing full speed into Your mouths, as moths dash to
destruction in a blazing fire.

TEXT 30

WW ‘c'FI-‘clT- Wu
WWW maﬁllsou

lelihyase grasamc‘mah samantc‘tl
lokdn samagrc‘m vadanair jvaladbhih

tejobhir apmya jagat samagram

bhdsas tavogrc‘th pratapcmti visno

SYNONYMS

lelihyase—You are licking; grasamc‘mah—devouring; samantc‘tt—from all
directions; lokc‘m—people; samagrc‘m—all; vadcmaih—by the mouths;
jvaladbhih—blazing; tejobhih—by effulgence; apmya—covering; jagat—the
universe; samagram—all; bhc‘tsah—rays; tava—Your; ugrc‘th—terrible;
pratapanti—are scorching; visno—O all-pervading Lord.

TRANSLATION

O Visnu, I see You devouring all people from all sides with Your flaming
mouths. Covering all the universe with Your effulgence, You are manifest with
terrible, scorching rays.

TEXT 31



mﬁﬁﬁnﬁawﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁamml
WWHEWHﬁﬁqﬁ-ﬂllwll

c‘tkhyc‘thi me ha bhavc‘m ugra—rﬁpo
namo ’stu te deva-vara prasida
vijﬁc‘ttum icchc‘tmi bhavantam c‘tdyam
ha hi prajc‘mc‘tmi tava pravrttim

SYNONYMS

c'tkhyc'thi—please explain; me—unto me; kah—who; bhavc‘m—You;
ugra—rﬁpah—fierce form; namah astu—obeisances; te—unto You;
deva-vara—O great one amongst the demigods; prasida—be gracious;
vijﬁc‘ttum—to know; icchc‘tmi—I wish; bhavcmtam—You; c‘tdyam—the original;
na—not; hi—certainly; prajc‘mc‘tmi—do I know; tava—Your;
pravrttim—mission.

TRANSLATION

O Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer my
obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. You are the primal Lord. I want
to know about You, for I do not know what Your mission is.

TEXT 32

WI
Wﬁﬁwﬁﬁmﬁﬁzmzl
ﬁSﬁﬁﬁﬁmﬁﬁsmzmgﬁwuaqu

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
kalo ’smi loka—ksaya—krt pravrddho
lokc‘m samahartum iha pravrttah
rte ’pi wam ha bhavisyanti sarve



ye ’vasthitc‘th pratyanikesu yodhc‘th

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Personality of Godhead said; kalah—time; asmi—I
am; loka—of the worlds; ksaya—th—the destroyer; pravrddhah—great;
lokc‘m—all people; same‘thartum—in destroying; iha—in this world;
pravrttah—engaged; Tte—without, except for; api—even; tvc‘tm—you;
na—never; bhavisyanti—will be; sarve—all; ye—who; avasthitc‘th—situated;
prati—anikesu—on the opposite sides; yodhc‘th—the soldiers.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Time I am, the great destroyer of
the worlds, and I have come here to destroy all people. With the exception of
you [the Pandavas], all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.

PURPORT

Although Arjuna knew that Krsna was his friend and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he was puzzled by the various forms exhibited by
Krsna. Therefore he asked further about the actual mission of this devastating
force. It is written in the Vedas that the Supreme Truth destroys everything,
even the brc‘thmanas. As stated in the Katha Upam'saa (1.2.25),

yasya brahma ca ksatram ca
ubhe bhavata odcmah
mrtyur yasyopasecanam
ka itthc‘t veda yatra sah

Eventually all the brc‘thmanas, ksatriyas and everyone else are devoured like
a meal by the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is the all-devouring
giant, and here Krsna presents Himself in that form of all-devouring time.
Except for a few Pandavas, everyone who was present on that battlefield would
be devoured by Him. Arjuna was not in favor of the fight, and he thought it
was better not to fight; then there would be no frustration. In reply, the Lord is



saying that even if he did not fight, every one of them would be destroyed, for
that was His plan. If Arjuna stopped fighting, they would die in another way.
Death could not be checked, even if he did not fight. In fact, they were already
dead. Time is destruction, and all manifestations are to be vanquished by the
desire of the Supreme Lord. That is the law of nature.

TEXT 33

aﬁmﬁaaﬁamaml
ﬁﬁﬁamﬁﬁaﬁrﬁmﬁnﬁamﬁiuasu

tasmdt tvam uttistha yas’o labhasva
jitvc‘t s’atrﬁn bhm’tksva rc‘tjyam samrddham
mayaivaite m'hatdh pﬁrvam eva
nimitta-mc‘ttram bhava savya—sc‘tcm

SYNONYMS

tasmc‘tt—therefore; tvam—you; uttistha—get up; yas’ah—fame; labhasva—gain;
jitvc‘t—conquering; s’atrﬁn—enemies; bhm’tksva—enjoy; rc‘tjyam—kingdom;
samrddham—flourishing; maya—by Me; eva—certainly; ete—all these;
nihatc‘th—killed; pﬁrvam eva—by previous arrangement; nimitta—mc‘ttram—just
the cause; bhava—become; savya—sc‘tcm—O Savyasaci.

TRANSLATION

Therefore get up. Prepare to fight and win glory. Conquer your enemies and
enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by My arrangement,
and you, O Savyasaci, can be but an instrument in the fight.

PURPORT

Savya-sc‘tcin refers to one who can shoot arrows very expertly in the field;
thus Arjuna is addressed as an expert warrior capable of delivering arrows to



kill his enemies. “Just become an instrument”: nimitta-mc‘ttmm. This word is
also very significant. The whole world is moving according to the plan of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Foolish persons who do not have sufficient
knowledge think that nature is moving without a plan and all manifestations
are but accidental formations. There are many so-called scientists who suggest
that perhaps it was like this, or maybe like that, but there is no question of
“perhaps” and “maybe.” There is a specific plan being carried out in this
material world. What is this plan.7 This cosmic manifestation is a chance for
the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead, back to home. As long as they
have the domineering mentality which makes them try to lord it over material
nature, they are conditioned. But anyone who can understand the plan of the
Supreme Lord and cultivate Krsna consciousness is most intelligent. The
creation and destruction of the cosmic manifestation are under the superior
guidance of God. Thus the Battle of Kuruksetra was fought according to the
plan of God. Arjuna was refusing to fight, but he was told that he should fight
in accordance with the desire of the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy.
If one is in full Krsna consciousness and his life is devoted to the Lord’s
transcendental service, he is perfect.

TEXT 34

Waﬁﬁamﬁaﬁammﬁﬁmﬁml
waﬁaﬁwﬁmwﬁmﬁﬁammeu

dronam ca bhismam ca jayadratham ca
kamam tathc‘myc‘m api yodha—virc‘m
mayc‘t hatc‘tms tvam jahi mc‘t vyathisthc‘t
yudhyasva jetc‘tsi rane sapatnc‘m

SYNONYMS

dronam ca—also Drona; bhismam ca—also Bhisma; jayadratham ca—also
]ayadratha; kamam—Karna; tathc‘t—also; anyc‘m—others; api—certainly;



yodha—vm‘m—great warriors; maya—by Me; hatc‘m—already killed; tvam—you;
jahi—destroy; mc‘t—do not; vyathisthc‘th—be disturbed; yudhyasva—just fight;
jetc‘t asi—you will conquer; rane—in the fight; sapatm‘m—enemies.

TRANSLATION

Drona, Bhisma, Jayadratha, Karna and the other great warriors have already
been destroyed by Me. Therefore, kill them and do not be disturbed. Simply
fight, and you will vanquish your enemies in battle.

PURPORT

Every plan is made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He is so
kind and merciful to His devotees that He wants to give the credit to His
devotees who carry out His plan according to His desire. Life should therefore
move in such a way that everyone acts in Krsna consciousness and understands
the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the medium of a spiritual master.
The plans of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are understood by His
mercy, and the plans of the devotees are as good as His plans. One should
follow such plans and be Victorious in the struggle for existence.

TEXT 35

WWI
mmmmmmzwl
Wwwwmwﬁmﬁazwuazu

saﬁjaya uvc‘tca
etac chrutvc‘t vacanam kes’avasya
krtc‘tﬁjalir vepamc‘mah kiriti
namaskrtvc‘t bhﬁya evc‘tha krsnam
sa—gadgadam bhita-bhitah pranamya



SYNONYMS

saﬁjayah uvc‘tca—Saﬁjaya said; etat—thus; s’rutvc‘t—hearing; vacanam—the
speech; kes’avasya—of Krsna; krta—aﬁjalih—with folded hands;
vepamc‘mah—trembling; kiriti—Arjuna; namaskrtvc‘t—offering obeisances;
bhﬁyah—again; eva—also; c‘tha—said; krsnam—unto Krsna;
sa-gadgadam—with a faltering voice; bhita—bhitah—fearful;
pranamya—offering obeisances.

TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said to Dhrtarastra: 0 King, after hearing these words from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the trembling Arjuna offered obeisances with
folded hands again and again. He fearfully spoke to Lord Krsna in a faltering
voice, as follows.

PURPORT

As we have already explained, because of the situation created by the
universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna became
bewildered in wonder; thus he began to offer his respectful obeisances to Krsna
again and again, and with faltering voice he began to pray, not as a friend, but
as a devotee in wonder.

TEXT 36

WWI
WWWWWHI
I&Tﬁtlﬁﬁﬁﬁ'iﬁﬁﬁﬁaaﬁwﬁaaﬁwnlasu

arjuna uvc‘tca
sthc‘me hrsikes’a tava prakirtyc‘t
jagat prahrsyaty anurajyate ca



raksc‘tmsi bhitc‘mi dis’o dravcmti
sarve namasyanti ca siddha—sahghc‘th

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; sthc‘me—rightly; hrsika-is’a—O master of all
senses; tava—Your; prakirtyc‘t—by the glories; jagat—the entire world;
prahrsyati—is rejoicing; anurajyate—is becoming attached; ca—and;
mksc‘tmsi—the demons; bhitc‘mi—out of fear; dis’ah—in all directions;
dravcmti—are ﬂeeing; sarve—all; namasyanti—are offering respects; ca—also;
siddha-sahghc‘th—the perfect human beings.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: 0 master of the senses, the world becomes joyful upon hearing
Your name, and thus everyone becomes attached to You. Although the
perfected beings offer You their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and
they flee here and there. All this is rightly done.

PURPORT

Arjuna, after hearing from Krsna about the outcome of the Battle of
Kuruksetra, became enlightened, and as a great devotee and friend of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead he said that everything done by Krsna is
quite fit. Arjuna confirmed that Krsna is the maintainer and the object of
worship for the devotees and the destroyer of the undesirables. His actions are
equally good for all. Arjuna understood herein that when the Battle of
Kuruksetra was being concluded, in outer space there were present many
demigods, siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets, and they were
observing the fight because Krsna was present there. When Arjuna saw the
universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, but others, who
were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord was praised. Out
of their natural fear of the devastating form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they fled. Krsna’s treatment of the devotees and the atheists is



praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devotee glorifies the Lord because he knows
that whatever He does is good for all.

TEXT 37

mﬁqaﬁwmwﬁaﬁamﬁswﬁﬁl
mﬁwﬁamanaﬁmﬁmuaeu

kasmc‘tc ca te ha namercm mahc‘ttman
gariyase brahmano ’py c‘tdi—kartre
ancmta deves’a jagan—nivc‘tsa
tvam aksaram sad—asat tat param yat

SYNONYMS

kasmc‘tt—why; ca—also; te—unto You; na—not; namercm—they should offer
proper obeisances; mahc‘t-c‘ttman—O great one; gariyase—who are better;
brahmanah—than Brahma; api—although; c‘tdi—kartre—to the supreme creator;
ammta—O unlimited; deva—is’a—O God of the gods; jagat-nivc‘tsa—O refuge of
the universe; tvam—You are; aksaram—imperishable; sat-asat—to cause and
effect; tat param—transcendental; yat—because.

TRANSLATION

0 great one, greater even than Brahma, You are the original creator. Why
then should they not offer their respectful obeisances unto You? O limitless
one, God of gods, refuge of the universe! You are the invincible source, the
cause of all causes, transcendental to this material manifestation.

PURPORT

By this offering of obeisances, Arjuna indicates that Krsna is worshipable
by everyone. He is all-pervading, and He is the Soul of every soul. Arjuna is
addressing Krsna as mahc‘ttmc‘t, which means that He is most magnanimous and



unlimited. Ananta indicates that there is nothing which is not covered by the
influence and energy of the Supreme Lord, and deves’a means that He is the
controller of all demigods and is above them all. He is the shelter of the whole
universe. Arjuna also thought that it was fitting that all the perfect living
entities and powerful demigods offer their respectful obeisances unto Him,
because no one is greater than Him. Arjuna especially mentions that Krsna is
greater than Brahma because Brahma is created by Him. Brahma is born out of
the lotus stem grown from the navel abdomen of Garbhodakas’ayi Visnu, who
is Krsna’s plenary expansion; therefore Brahma and Lord Siva, who is born of
Brahma, and all other demigods must offer their respectful obeisances. It is
stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam that the Lord is respected by Lord Siva and
Brahma and similar other demigods. The word aksaram is very significant
because this material creation is subject to destruction but the Lord is above
this material creation. He is the cause of all causes, and being so, He is superior
to all the conditioned souls within this material nature as well as the material
cosmic manifestation itself. He is therefore the all-great Supreme.

TEXT 38

mﬁéwwzw—WEWW'WI
maﬁaqiaumamaaﬁamwuwu

tvam c‘tdi—devah purusah purc‘mas
tvam asya vis’vasya param nidhc‘mam
vettc‘tsi vedyam ca param ca dhc‘tma
tvayc‘t tatam vis’vam ananta—rﬁpa

SYNONYMS

tvam—You; ddi—devah—the original Supreme God; purusah—personality;
purc‘mah—old; tvam—You; asya—of this; vis’vasya—universe;
param—transcendental; nidhc‘mam—refuge; vettc‘t—the knower; asi—You are;
vedyam—the knowable; ca—and; param—transcendental; ca—and;



dhc‘tma—refuge; tvayc‘t—by You; tatam—pervaded; vis’vam—the universe;
ananta—rﬁpa—O unlimited form.

TRANSLATION

You are the original Personality of Godhead, the oldest, the ultimate
sanctuary of this manifested cosmic world. You are the knower of everything,
and You are all that is knowable. You are the supreme refuge, above the
material modes. 0 limitless form! This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded

by You!

PURPORT

Everything is resting on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore He
is the ultimate rest. Nidhc‘mam means that everything, even the Brahman
effulgence, rests on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. He is the
knower of everything that is happening in this world, and if knowledge has
any end, He is the end of all knowledge; therefore He is the known and the
knowable. He is the object of knowledge because He is all-pervading. Because
He is the cause in the spiritual world, He is transcendental. He is also the chief
personality in the transcendental world.

TEXT 39

WSW: W: W mg l
=rq‘r HHFEI‘SQ 8813795791: 11353 Tirsfﬁ =rq‘r m H 32 u

vc‘tym yamo ’gm'r varunah s’as’c‘mkah
prajc‘tpatis tvam prapitc‘tmahas’ ca

namo namas te ’stu sahasra—krtvah

punas’ ca bhﬁyo ’pi namo namas te

SYNONYMS



vc‘tyuh—air; yamah—the controller; agm'h—fire; varunah—water;
s’as’a—ahkah—the moon; prajc‘tpatih—Brahma; tvam—You; prapitc‘tmahah—the
great-grandfather; ca—also; namah—my respects; namah—again my respects;
te—unto You; astu—let there be; sahasra—krtvah—a thousand times; punah
ca—and again; bhﬁyah—again; api—also; namah—offering my respects;
namah te—offering my respects unto You.

TRANSLATION

You are air, and You are the supreme controller! You are fire, You are
water, and You are the moon! You are Brahma, the first living creature, and
You are the great-grandfather. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto
You a thousand times, and again and yet again!

PURPORT

The Lord is addressed here as air because the air is the most important
representation of all the demigods, being all-pervasive. Arjuna also addresses
Krsna as the great-grandfather because He is the father of Brahma, the first
living creature in the universe.

TEXT 40

mzwagsaﬁaﬁsaéaéaqaaél
Wﬁmﬁaﬁﬁrﬁwaou

namah purastc‘td atha prsthatas te
namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva

ammta—viryc‘tmita-vikramas tvam

sarvam same‘tpnosi tato ’si sarvah

SYNONYMS

namah—offering obeisances; purastc‘tt—from the front; atha—also;



prsthatah—from behind; te—unto You; namah astu—I offer my respects;
te—unto You; sarvatah—from all sides; eva—indeed; sarva—because You are
everything; ananta-virya—unlimited potency; amita—vikramah—and unlimited
force; tvam—You; sarvam—everything; samapnosi—You cover;
tatah—therefore; asi—You are; sarvah—everything.

TRANSLATION

Obeisances to You from the front, from behind and from all sides! 0
unbounded power, You are the master of limitless might! You are all-pervading,
and thus You are everything!

PURPORT

Out of loving ecstasy for Krsna, his friend, Arjuna is offering his respects
from all sides. He is accepting that He is the master of all potencies and all
prowess and far superior to all the great warriors assembled on the battlefield.

It is said in the I/I'mu Purina (1.9.69):

yo ’yam tavc‘tgato deva
samipam devatc‘t—ganah
sa tvam eva jagat—srastc‘t
yatah sarva—gato bhavc‘m

“Whoever comes before You, be he a demigod, is created by You, 0
Supreme Personality of Godhead.”

TEXTS 41—42

aﬁﬁwmﬁaﬁ§w§w§aﬁﬁn
WWWWWEWHBM

WWSﬁ-f W |



Haasuarcaﬁa mm W WWII 8? ||

sakheti matvc‘t prasabham yad uktam
he krsna he yt‘tdava he sakheti
ajc‘matc‘t mahimc‘mam tavedam
mayc‘t pramc‘tdt‘tt pranayena Udpi

yac cc‘wahc‘tsc‘trtham asat-krto ’si
vihc‘tra-s’ayyc‘tsana—bhojcmesu
eko ’tha vc‘tpy acyuta tat-samaksam
tat ksc‘tmaye tvc‘tm aham aprameyam

SYNONYMS

sakhc‘t—friend; iti—thus; matvc‘t—thinking; prasabham—presumptuously;
yat—whatever; uktam—said; he krsna—O Krsna; he yt‘tdava—O Yadava; he
sakhe—O my dear friend; iti—thus; ajc'matc't—without knowing;
mahimc‘mam—glories; tava—Your; idam—this; maya—by me; pramc‘tdt‘tt—out
of foolishness; pranayena—out of love; U67 api—either; yat—whatever;
ca—also; avahc‘tsa—artham—for joking; asat-krtah—dishonored; asi—You have
been; vihc‘tra—in relaxation; s’ayyc‘t—in lying down; c‘tscma—in sitting;
bhojcmesu—or while eating together; ekah—alone; atha vc‘t—or; api—also;
acyuta—O infallible one; tat—samaksam—among companions; tat—all those;
ksc‘tmaye—ask forgiveness; tvdm—from You; aham—I;
aprameyam—immeasurable.

TRANSLATION

Thinking of You as my friend, I have rashly addressed You “O Krsna,” “O
Yadava,” “O my friend,” not knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I
may have done in madness or in love. I have dishonored You many times,
jesting as we relaxed, lay on the same bed, or sat or ate together, sometimes
alone and sometimes in front of many friends. 0 infallible one, please excuse me
for all those offenses.



PURPORT

Although Krsna is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form, Arjuna
remembers his friendly relationship with Krsna and is therefore asking pardon
and requesting Krsna to excuse him for the many informal gestures which arise
out of friendship. He is admitting that formerly he did not know that Krsna
could assume such a universal form, although Krsna explained it as his
intimate friend. Arjuna did not know how many times he may have
dishonored Krsna by addressing Him “0 my friend,” “0 Krsna,” “O Yadava,”
etc., without acknowledging His opulence. But Krsna is so kind and merciful
that in spite of such opulence He played with Arjuna as a friend. Such is the
transcendental loving reciprocation between the devotee and the Lord. The
relationship between the living entity and Krsna is fixed eternally; it cannot
be forgotten, as we can see from the behavior of Arjuna. Although Arjuna has
seen the opulence in the universal form, he cannot forget his friendly
relationship with Krsna.

TEXT 43

ﬁaﬁraﬁwwwwa WI
3 WSW: WW1 WSW || 83 ||

pitc‘tsi lokasya caracarasya
tvam asya pﬁjyas’ ca gurm gariyc‘m
ha tvat—samo ’sty abhyadhikah kuto ’nyo
loka—traye ’py apratima—prabhc‘wa

SYNONYMS

pitc‘t—the father; asi—You are; lokasya—of all the world; cara—moving;
acarasya—and nonmoving; tvam—You are; asya—of this;
pﬁjyah—worshipable; ca—also; guruh—master; gariyc‘m—glorious; na—never;
tvat-samah—equal to You; asti—there is; abhyadhikah—greater; kutah—how is



it possible; anyah—other; loka-tmye—in the three planetary systems;
api—also; apratima—prabhc‘wa—O immeasurable power.

TRANSLATION

You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, of the moving and
the nonmoving. You are its worshipable chief, the supreme spiritual master. No
one is equal to You, nor can anyone be one with You. How then could there be
anyone greater than You within the three worlds, 0 Lord of immeasurable
power?

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is worshipable as a father is
worshipable for his son. He is the spiritual master because He originally gave
the Vedic instructions to Brahma and presently He is also instructing
Bhagavad-gitc‘t to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and any
bona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendant in the
line of disciplic succession stemming from Krsna. Without being a
representative of Krsna, one cannot become a teacher or spiritual master of
transcendental subject matter.

The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects. He is of immeasurable
greatness. No one can be greater than the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna, because no one is equal to or higher than Krsna within any
manifestation, spiritual or material. Everyone is below Him. No one can excel
Him. This is stated in the gvetésVatara Upam'saa (6.8):

ha tasya kc‘tryam karanam ca vidyate
ha tat—samas’ cc‘tbhyadhikas’ ca drs’yate

The Supreme Lord, Krsna, has senses and a body like the ordinary man, but
for Him there is no difference between His senses, His body, His mind and
Himself. Foolish persons who do not perfectly know Him say that Krsna is
different from His soul, mind, heart and everything else. Krsna is absolute;
therefore His activities and potencies are supreme. It is also stated that



although He does not have senses like ours, He can perform all sensory
activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect nor limited. No one can
be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him, and everyone is lower than
Him.

The knowledge, strength and activities of the Supreme Personality are all
transcendental. As stated in Bbagavad—gité (4.9):

jcmma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah

tyaktvc‘t deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so ’rjuna

Whoever knows Krsna’s transcendental body, activities and perfection,
after quitting his body, returns to Him and doesn’t come back again to this
miserable world. Therefore one should know that Krsna’s activities are
different from others. The best policy is to follow the principles of Krsna; that
will make one perfect. It is also stated that there is no one who is master of
Krsna; everyone is His servant. The Caitanya—caritc‘tmrta (A_d1 5.142) confirms,
ekale is’vara krsna, c‘tra saba bhrtya: only Krsna is God, and everyone else is His
servant. Everyone is complying with His order. There is no one who can deny
His order. Everyone is acting according to His direction, being under His
superintendence. As stated in the Bmhma-samhitc't, He is the cause of all
causes.

TEXT 44

WWWWWI
Wwwmzmzmﬁrﬁaﬁmueeu

tasmc‘tt pranamya pranidhc‘tya kayam
prasc‘tdaye tvc‘tm aham is’am idyam
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuh
priyah priyayc‘trhasi deva sodhum



SYNONYMS

tasmc‘tt—therefore; pranamya—offering obeisances; pranidhc‘tya—laying down;
kc‘tyam—the body; prasc‘tdaye—to beg mercy; tvc‘tm—unto You; aham—I;
is’am—unto the Supreme Lord; idyam—worshipable; pitc‘t iva—like a father;
putrasya—with a son; sakhc‘t iva—like a friend; sakhyuh—with a friend;
priyah—a lover; priyayc‘th—with the dearmost; arhasi—You should; deva—my
Lord; sodhum—tolerate.

TRANSLATION

You are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I fall
down to offer You my respectful obeisances and ask Your mercy. As a father
tolerates the impudence of his son, or a friend tolerates the impertinence of a
friend, or a wife tolerates the familiarity of her partner, please tolerate the
wrongs I may have done You.

PURPORT

Krsna’s devotees relate to Krsna in various relationships; one might treat
Krsna as a son, or one might treat Krsna as a husband, as a friend, or as a
master. Krsna and Arjuna are related in friendship. As the father tolerates, or
the husband or a master tolerates, so Krsna tolerates.

TEXT 45

Wgﬁaﬁmwaﬁﬁamﬁﬁl
aﬁaﬁaﬁfqﬁawmaaﬁwﬁamuexu

adrsta-pmvam hrsito ’smi drstvc‘t
bhayena ca pravyathitam memo me
tad eva me dars’aya deva rﬁpam
prasida deves’a jagan-nivc‘tsa



SYNONYMS

adrsta-pmvam—never seen before; hrsitah—gladdened; asmi—I am;
drstvc‘t—by seeing; bhayena—out of fear; ca—also; pravyathitam—perturbed;
manah—mind; me—my; tat—that; eva—certainly; me—unto me;
dars’aya—show; deva—O Lord; rﬁpam—the form; prasida—just be gracious;
deva—is’a—O Lord of lords; jagat—nivc‘tsa—O refuge of the universe.

TRANSLATION

After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am
gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear. Therefore
please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your form as the

Personality of Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of the universe.

PURPORT

Arjuna is always in confidence with Krsna because he is a very dear friend,
and as a dear friend is gladdened by his friends opulence, Arjuna is very joyful
to see that his friend Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and can
show such a wonderful universal form. But at the same time, after seeing that
universal form, he is afraid that he has committed so many offenses to Krsna
out of his unalloyed friendship. Thus his mind is disturbed out of fear,
although he had no reason to fear. Arjuna therefore is asking Krsna to show
His Narayana form, because He can assume any form. This universal form is
material and temporary, as the material world is temporary. But in the
Vaikuntha planets He has His transcendental form with four hands as
Narayana. There are innumerable planets in the spiritual sky, and in each of
them Krsna is present by His plenary manifestations of different names. Thus
Arjuna desired to see one of the forms manifest in the Vaikuntha planets. Of
course in each Vaikuntha planet the form of Narayana is four-handed, but the
four hands hold different arrangements of symbols—the conchshell, mace,
lotus and disc. According to the different hands these four things are held in,



the Narayanas are variously named. All of these forms are one with Krsna;
therefore Arjuna requests to see His four-handed feature.

TEXT 46
WWW—Wﬁﬁﬁgﬁéﬁﬁﬁl
ﬁaeﬁwwjﬁqmwﬁaﬁuaau

kiritinam gadinam cakra—hastam
icchc‘tmi wam drastum aham tathaiva
tenaiva mpena catur—bhujena
sahasra—bc‘tho bhava vis’va—mmte

SYNONYMS

kiritinam—with helmet; gadinam—with club; cakra—hastam—disc in hand;
icchc‘tmi—I wish; tvc‘tm—You; drastum—to see; aham—I; tathd eva—in that
position; tena eva—in that; mpena—form; catuh—bhujena—four-handed;
sahasra—bc‘tho—O thousand-handed one; bhava—just become; Uis’va—mmte—O
universal form.

TRANSLATION

0 universal form, 0 thousand-armed Lord, I wish to see You in Your
four-armed form, with helmeted head and with club, wheel, conch and lotus
flower in Your hands. I long to see You in that form.

PURPORT

In the Brabma-samlu'ta (5.39) it is stated, rc‘tmc‘tdi—mmtisu kald—niyamena
tisthcm: the Lord is eternally situated in hundreds and thousands of forms, and
the main forms are those like Rama, Nrsimha, Narayana, etc. There are
innumerable forms. But Arjuna knew that Krsna is the original Personality of
Godhead assuming His temporary universal form. He is now asking to see the



form of Narayana, a spiritual form. This verse establishes without any doubt
the statement of the Srimad-Bhagavatam that Krsna is the original Personality
of Godhead and all other features originate from Him. He is not different from
His plenary expansions, and He is God in any of His innumerable forms. In all
of these forms He is fresh like a young man. That is the constant feature of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who knows Krsna becomes free at once
from all contamination of the material world.

TEXT 47

WI
WWWWWWI
WﬁWﬁaﬁﬁﬁmueou

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
mayc‘t prasannena tavc‘trjunedam
rﬁpam param dars’itam dtma—yogdt
tejo-mayam vis’vam ancmtam c‘tdyam
yam me tvad anyena ha drsta—pmvam

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; maya—by Me;
prasannena—happily; tava—unto you; arjuna—O Arjuna; idam—this;
rﬁpam—form; param—transcendental; dars’itam—shown; c‘ttma-yogc‘tt—by My
internal potency; tejah—mayam—full of effulgence; vis’vam—the entire
universe; cmantam—unlimited; c‘tdyam—original; yat—that which; me—My;
tvat anyena—besides you; met drsta—pmvam—no one has previously seen.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, happily have I
shown you, by My internal potency, this supreme universal form within the
material world. No one before you has ever seen this primal form, unlimited and



full of glaring effulgence.

PURPORT

Arjuna wanted to see the universal form of the Supreme Lord, so Lord
Krsna, out of His mercy upon His devotee Arjuna, showed His universal form,
full of effulgence and opulence. This form was glaring like the sun, and its
many faces were rapidly changing. Krsna showed this form just to satisfy the
desire of His friend Arjuna. This form was manifested by Krsna through His
internal potency, which is inconceivable by human speculation. No one had
seen this universal form of the Lord before Arjuna, but because the form was
shown to Arjuna, other devotees in the heavenly planets and in other planets
in outer space could also see it. They had not seen it before, but because of
Arjuna they were also able to see it. In other words, all the disciplic devotees of
the Lord could see the universal form which was shown to Arjuna by the
mercy of Krsna. Someone has commented that this form was shown to
Duryodhana also when Krsna went to Duryodhana to negotiate for peace.
Unfortunately, Duryodhana did not accept the peace offer, but at that time
Krsna manifested some of His universal forms. But those forms are different
from this one shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that no one had ever seen this
form before.

TEXT 48

qWﬁ—ﬁamﬁﬁaﬁﬁlﬁzl
szﬁwmaﬁamuew

ha veda-yajﬁc‘tdhyayanair ha dc‘mair

ha ca kriyc‘tbhir ha tapobhir ugraih
evam—rﬁpah s’akya aham m—loke

drastum tvad anyena kuru—pravira

SYNONYMS



na—never; veda-yajﬁa—by sacrifice; adhyayanaih—or Vedic study;
na—never; dc‘maih—by charity; na—never; ca—also; kriyc‘tbhih—by pious
activities; na—never; tapobhih—by serious penances; ugmih—severe;
evam-rﬁpah—in this form; s’akyah—can; aham—I; m—loke—in this material
world; drastum—be seen; tvat—than you; anyena—by another;
kuru—pravira—O best among the Kuru warriors.

TRANSLATION

0 best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this universal
form of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor by performing sacrifices,
nor by charity, nor by pious activities, nor by severe penances can I be seen in
this form in the material world.

PURPORT

The divine Vision in this connection should be clearly understood. Who
can have divine Vision.7 Divine means godly. Unless one attains the status of
divinity as a demigod, he cannot have divine Vision. And what is a demigod? It
is stated in the Vedic scriptures that those who are devotees of Lord Visnu are
demigods (Visnu—bhaktc‘th smrtc‘t devah). Those who are atheistic, i.e., who do not
believe in Visnu, or who recognize only the impersonal part of Krsna as the
Supreme, cannot have the divine Vision. It is not possible to decry Krsna and
at the same time have the divine Vision. One cannot have the divine Vision
without becoming divine. In other words, those who have divine Vision can
also see like Arjuna.

The Bhagavad-gitc‘t gives the description of the universal form. Although
this description was unknown to everyone before Arjuna, now one can have
some idea of the Uis’va-Tﬁpa after this incident. Those who are actually divine
can see the universal form of the Lord. But one cannot be divine without
being a pure devotee of Krsna. The devotees, however, who are actually in the
divine nature and who have divine Vision, are not very much interested in
seeing the universal form of the Lord. As described in the previous verse,
Arjuna desired to see the four-handed form of Lord Krsna as Visnu, and he



was actually afraid of the universal form.

In this verse there are some significant words, just like
veda—yajﬁc‘tdhyayanaih, which refers to studying Vedic literature and the
subject matter of sacrificial regulations. Veda refers to all kinds of Vedic
literature, such as the four Vedas (Rg, Yajur, 85mm and Atharva) and the
eighteen Purc‘mas, the Upcmisads and the Vedc‘mta—sﬁtra. One can study these
at home or anywhere else. Similarly, there are sﬁtras—Kalpa-sﬁtms and
Mimamsa-sﬁtms—for studying the method of sacrifice. Dc'maih refers to
charity which is offered to a suitable party, such as those who are engaged in
the transcendental loving serVice of the Lord—the brc‘thmanas and the
Vaisnavas. Similarly, “pious activities” refers to the agni-hotm and the
prescribed duties of the different castes. And the voluntary acceptance of
some bodily pains is called tapasya. So one can perform all these—can accept
bodily penances, give charity, study the Vedas, etc.—but unless he is a devotee
like Arjuna, it is not possible to see that universal form. Those who are
impersonalists are also imagining that they are seeing the universal form of the
Lord, but from Bhagavad-gitc‘t we understand that the impersonalists are not
devotees. Therefore they are unable to see the universal form of the Lord.

There are many persons who create incarnations. They falsely claim an
ordinary human to be an incarnation, but this is all foolishness. We should
follow the principles of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, otherwise there is no possibility of
attaining perfect spiritual knowledge. Although Bhagavad-gitc‘t is considered
the preliminary study of the science of God, still it is so perfect that it enables
one to distinguish what is what. The followers of a pseudo incarnation may say
that they have also seen the transcendental incarnation of God, the universal
form, but that is unacceptable because it is clearly stated here that unless one
becomes a devotee of Krsna one cannot see the universal form of God. So one
first of all has to become a pure devotee of Krsna; then he can claim that he
can show the universal form of what he has seen. A devotee of Krsna cannot
accept false incarnations or followers of false incarnations.

TEXT 49



mﬁwmmaﬁwﬁqgreﬁﬁﬁaﬁaﬁml
aﬁmﬁznﬁngaﬁaﬁaﬁwﬁa‘muasu

mc‘t te vyathc‘t mc‘t ca vimﬁdha—bhc‘wo
drstvc‘t rﬁpam ghoram idm mamedam
vyapeta—bhih prita—mam‘th punas tvam
tad eva me rﬁpam idam prapas’ya

SYNONYMS

mc‘t—let it not be; te—unto you; vyathc't—trouble; mc‘t—let it not be; ca—also;
vimﬁdha—bhc‘wah—bewilderment; drstvc‘t—by seeing; rﬁpam—form;
ghoram—horrible; idi—as it is; mama—My; idam—this; vyapeta—bhih—free
from all fear; prita—mam‘th—pleased in mind; punah—again; tvam—you;
tat—that; eva—thus; me—My; rﬁpam—form; idam—this; prapas’ya—just see.

TRANSLATION

You have been perturbed and bewildered by seeing this horrible feature of
Mine. Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free again from all disturbances.
With a peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.

PURPORT

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gitc‘t Arjuna was worried about killing Bhisma
and Drona, his worshipful grandfather and master. But Krsna said that he
need not be afraid of killing his grandfather. When the sons of Dhrtarastra
tried to disrobe Draupadi in the assembly of the Kurus, Bhisma and Drona
were silent, and for such negligence of duty they should be killed. Krsna
showed His universal form to Arjuna just to show him that these people were
already killed for their unlawful action. That scene was shown to Arjuna
because devotees are always peaceful and they cannot perform such horrible
actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universal form was shown; now
Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Krsna showed him. A devotee



is not much interested in the universal form, for it does not enable one to
reciprocate loving feelings. Either a devotee wants to offer his respectful
worshipful feelings, or he wants to see the two-handed Krsna form so that he
can reciprocate in loving serVice with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 50

WWI
wmammwmwl
anammﬁaﬁﬁwﬂgﬁzﬁmagﬁamuxou

saﬁjaya uvc‘tca
ity arjunam vc‘tsudevas tathoktvc‘t
svakam rﬁpam dars’ayc‘tm c‘tsa bhﬁyah
c‘ts’vc‘tsayc‘tm c‘tsa ca bhitam enam
bhﬁtvc‘t punah saumya—vapm mahc‘ttmc‘t

SYNONYMS

saﬁjayah uvc‘tca—Saﬁjaya said; iti—thus; arjunam—unto Arjuna;
vc‘tsudevah—Krsna; tathc‘t—in that way; uktvc‘t—speaking; svakam—His own;
rﬁpam—form; dars’ayc‘tm c‘tsa—showed; bhﬁyah—again; c‘ts’vc‘tsayc‘tm
c‘tsa—encouraged; ca—also; bhitam—fearful; enam—him; bhﬁtvc‘t—becoming;
punah—again; saumya-vapuh—the beautiful form; mahc‘t—c‘ttmc‘t—the great one.

TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said to Dhrtarastra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
having spoken thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form and at last
showed His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearful Arjuna.

PURPORT

When Krsna appeared as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, He first of all



appeared as four-armed Narayana, but when He was requested by His parents,
He transformed Himself into an ordinary child in appearance. Similarly, Krsna
knew that Arjuna was not interested in seeing a four-handed form, but since
Arjuna asked to see this four-handed form, Krsna also showed him this form
again and then showed Himself in His two-handed form. The word
saumya—vapuh is very significant. Saumya—vapuh is a very beautiful form; it is
known as the most beautiful form. When He was present, everyone was
attracted simply by Krsna’s form, and because Krsna is the director of the
universe, He just banished the fear of Arjuna, His devotee, and showed him
again His beautiful form of Krsna. In the Brabma-san'ilu'ta (5.38) it is stated,
premaﬁjana—cchurita—bhakti—vilocanena: only a person whose eyes are smeared
with the ointment of love can see the beautiful form of Sri Krsna.

saFﬁtrlﬁqsiqerzaﬁaT Wm "99"

arjuna uvc‘tca
drstvedam mc‘musam rﬁpam
tava saumyam janc'trdana
idc‘mim asmi samvrttah
sa-cetc‘th prakrtim gatah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; drstvc‘t—seeing; idam—this; mc‘musam—human;
rﬁpam—form; tava—Your; saumyam—very beautiful; janc‘trdana—O chastiser
of the enemies; idc‘mim—now; asmi—I am; samvrttah—settled; sa—cetc‘th—in
my consciousness; prakrtim—to my own nature; gatah—returned.

TRANSLATION



When Arjuna thus saw Krsna in His original form, he said: O Janardana,
seeing this humanlike form, so very beautiful, I am now composed in mind, and
I am restored to my original nature.

PURPORT

Here the words mc‘musam Tapam clearly indicate the Supreme Personality of
Godhead to be originally two-handed. Those who deride Krsna as if He were
an ordinary person are shown here to be ignorant of His divine nature. If
Krsna is like an ordinary human being, then how is it possible for Him to show
the universal form and again to show the four-handed Narayana form? So it is
very clearly stated in Bhagavad-gitc‘t that one who thinks that Krsna is an
ordinary person and who misguides the reader by claiming that it is the
impersonal Brahman within Krsna speaking is doing the greatest injustice.
Krsna has actually shown His universal form and His four-handed Visnu form.
So how can He be an ordinary human being? A pure devotee is not confused
by misguiding commentaries on Bhagavad-gitc‘t because he knows what is what.
The original verses of Bhagavad-gitc‘t are as clear as the sun; they do not require
lamplight from foolish commentators.

TEXT 52

O 9
WWW WWI
ﬁamwﬁﬁmﬁaﬂsﬁw "99"

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
su—durdars’am idam rﬁpam
drstavc‘m asi ycm mama
devc‘t apy asya rﬂpasya
nityam dars’ana-kc‘mksinah



SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
su—durdars’am—very difficult to see; idam—this; rﬁpam—form; drstavc‘m
asi—as you have seen; yat—which; mama—of Mine; devah—the demigods;
api—also; asya—this; rﬂpasya—form; nityam—eternally;
dars’cma—kc‘mksinah—aspiring to see.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, this form of
Mine you are now seeing is very difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever
seeking the opportunity to see this form, which is so dear.

PURPORT

In the forty-eighth verse of this chapter Lord Krsna concluded revealing
His universal form and informed Arjuna that this form is not possible to be
seen by so many pious activities, sacrifices, etc. Now here the word
su-dmdars’am is used, indicating that Krsna’s two-handed form is still more
confidential. One may be able to see the universal form of Krsna by adding a
little tinge of devotional serVice to various activities like penances, Vedic study
and philosophical speculation. It may be possible, but without a tinge of bhakti
one cannot see; that has already been explained. Still, beyond that universal
form, the form of Krsna with two hands is still more difficult to see, even for
demigods like Brahma and Lord Siva. They desire to see Him, and we have
evidence in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that when He was supposed to be in the
womb of His mother, Devaki, all the demigods from heaven came to see the
marvel of Krsna, and they offered nice prayers to the Lord, although He was
not at that time Visible to them. They waited to see Him. A foolish person may
deride Him, thinking Him an ordinary person, and may offer respect not to
Him but to the impersonal “something” within Him, but these are all
nonsensical postures. Krsna in His two-armed form is actually desired to be



seen by demigods like Brahma and Siva.

In Bbagavad—gita (9.11) it is also confirmed, avajc‘manti mam mﬁdhc‘t mc‘musim
tcmum c'ts’ritah: He is not Visible to the foolish persons who deride Him. Krsna’s
body, as confirmed by Bmhma-samhitc't and confirmed by Krsna Himself in
Bhagavad-gitc‘t, is completely spiritual and full of bliss and eternality. His body
is never like a material body. But for some who make a study of Krsna by
reading Bhagavad-gitc‘t or similar Vedic scriptures, Krsna is a problem. For one
using a material process, Krsna is considered to be a great historical personality
and very learned philosopher, but He is an ordinary man, and even though He
was so powerful He had to accept a material body. Ultimately they think that
the Absolute Truth is impersonal; therefore they think that from His
impersonal feature He assumed a personal feature attached to material nature.
This is a materialistic calculation of the Supreme Lord. Another calculation is
speculative. Those who are in search of knowledge also speculate on Krsna and
consider Him to be less important than the universal form of the Supreme.
Thus some think that the universal form of Krsna which was manifested to
Arjuna is more important than His personal form. According to them, the
personal form of the Supreme is something imaginary. They believe that in the
ultimate issue, the Absolute Truth is not a person. But the transcendental
process is described in Bhagavad-gitc‘t, Chapter Four: to hear about Krsna from
authorities. That is the actual Vedic process, and those who are actually in the
Vedic line hear about Krsna from authority, and by repeated hearing about
Him, Krsna becomes dear. As we have several times discussed, Krsna is covered
by His yoga-mc'tyc't potency. He is not to be seen or revealed to anyone and
everyone. Only by one to whom He reveals Himself can He be seen. This is
confirmed in Vedic literature; for one who is a surrendered soul, the Absolute
Truth can actually be understood. The transcendentalist, by continuous Krsna
consciousness and by devotional serVice to Krsna, can have his spiritual eyes
opened and can see Krsna by revelation. Such a revelation is not possible even
for the demigods; therefore it is difficult even for the demigods to understand
Krsna, and the advanced demigods are always in hope of seeing Krsna in His
two-handed form. The conclusion is that although to see the universal form of
Krsna is very, very difficult and not possible for anyone and everyone, it is still



more difficult to understand His personal form as Syamasundara.

TEXT 53

Wﬁﬁmaaﬁﬁﬁﬁml
wwﬁﬁmwﬁmumuaau

ndham vedair ha tapasc‘t
ha dc‘mena ha cejyayc‘t
s’akya evam—vidho drastum
drstavc‘m asi mam yathc‘t

SYNONYMS

na—never; aham—I; vedaih—by study of the Vedas; na—never; tapasc‘t—by
serious penances; na—never; dc'memt—by charity; na—never; ca—also;
ijyayc‘t—by worship; s’akyah—it is possible; evam—vidhah—like this;
drastum—to see; drstavc‘m—seeing; asi—you are; mc‘tm—Me; yathc‘t—as.

TRANSLATION

The form you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be understood
simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing serious penances, nor by
charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means that one can see Me as I am.

PURPORT

Krsna first appeared before His parents Devaki and Vasudeva in a
four-handed form, and then He transformed Himself into the two-handed
form. This mystery is very difficult to understand for those who are atheists or
who are devoid of devotional serVice. For scholars who have simply studied
Vedic literature by way of grammatical knowledge or mere academic
qualifications, Krsna is not possible to understand. Nor is He to be understood
by persons who officially go to the temple to offer worship. They make their



Visit, but they cannot understand Krsna as He is. Krsna can be understood
only through the path of devotional service, as explained by Krsna Himself in
the next verse.

TEXT 54

WWWWSQHI
mmaaﬁﬁnﬁgammuxeu

bhaktyc‘t tv cmanyayd s’akya
aham evam—vidho ’rjuna

jﬁc‘ttum drastum ca tattvena
pravestum ca parantapa

SYNONYMS

bhaktyc‘t—by devotional service; tu—but; ananyayc‘t—without being mixed
with fruitive activities or speculative knowledge; s’akyah—possible; aham—I;
evam—Uidhah—like this; arjuna—O Arjuna; jﬁc‘ttum—to know; drastum—to
see; ca—and; tattvena—in fact; pravestum—to enter into; ca—also;
parantapa—O mighty-armed one.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be understood as
I am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly. Only in this way can
you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.

PURPORT

Krsna can be understood only by the process of undivided devotional
serVice. He explicitly explains this in this verse so that unauthorized
commentators, who try to understand Bhagavad-gitc‘t by the speculative process,
will know that they are simply wasting their time. No one can understand



Krsna or how He came from parents in a four-handed form and at once
changed Himself into a two-handed form. These things are very difficult to
understand by study of the Vedas or by philosophical speculation. Therefore it
is clearly stated here that no one can see Him or enter into understanding of
these matters. Those who, however, are very experienced students of Vedic
literature can learn about Him from the Vedic literature in so many ways.
There are so many rules and regulations, and if one at all wants to understand
Krsna, he must follow the regulative principles described in the authoritative
literature. One can perform penance in accordance with those principles. For
example, to undergo serious penances one may observe fasting on ]anmastami,
the day on which Krsna appeared, and on the two days of Ekadas’i (the
eleventh day after the new moon and the eleventh day after the full moon).
As far as charity is concerned, it is plain that charity should be given to the
devotees of Krsna who are engaged in His devotional serVice to spread the
Krsna philosophy, or Krsna consciousness, throughout the world. Krsna
consciousness is a benediction to humanity. Lord Caitanya was appreciated by
Rupa Gosvami as the most munificent man of charity because love of Krsna,
which is very difficult to achieve, was distributed freely by Him. So if one gives
some amount of his money to persons involved in distributing Krsna
consciousness, that charity, given to spread Krsna consciousness, is the greatest
charity in the world. And if one worships as prescribed in the temple (in the
temples in India there is always some statue, usually of Visnu or Krsna), that is
a chance to progress by offering worship and respect to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. For the beginners in devotional serVice to the Lord,
temple worship is essential, and this is confirmed in the Vedic literature
(§Vetés”vatara Upam'saa 6.23):

yasya deve para bhaktir

yathc‘t deve tathd gurau
tasyaite kathitc‘t hy arthc‘th
prakc‘ts’ante mahc‘ttmanah

[8U 6.23(881)]

One who has unﬂinching devotion for the Supreme Lord and is directed by



the spiritual master, in whom he has similar unﬂinching faith, can see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by revelation. One cannot understand Krsna
by mental speculation. For one who does not take personal training under the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, it is impossible to even begin to
understand Krsna. The word tu is specifically used here to indicate that no
other process can be used, can be recommended, or can be successful in
understanding Krsna.

The personal forms of Krsna, the two-handed form and the four-handed,
are completely different from the temporary universal form shown to Arjuna.
The four-handed form of Narayana and the two-handed form of Krsna are
eternal and transcendental, whereas the universal form exhibited to Arjuna is
temporary. The very word sudmdars’am, meaning “difficult to see,” suggests
that no one had seen that universal form. It also suggests that amongst the
devotees there was no necessity of showing it. That form was exhibited by
Krsna at the request of Arjuna so that in the future, when one represents
himself as an incarnation of God, people can ask to see his universal form.

The word ha, used repeatedly in the previous verse, indicates that one
should not be very much proud of such credentials as an academic education in
Vedic literature. One must take to the devotional serVice of Krsna. Only then
can one attempt to write commentaries on Bhagavad—gitc‘t.

Krsna changes from the universal form to the four-handed form of
Narayana and then to His own natural form of two hands. This indicates that
the four-handed forms and other forms mentioned in Vedic literature are all
emanations of the original two-handed Krsna. He is the origin of all
emanations. Krsna is distinct even from these forms, what to speak of the
impersonal conception. As far as the four-handed forms of Krsna are
concerned, it is stated clearly that even the most identical four-handed form of
Krsna (which is known as Maha-Visnu, who is lying on the cosmic ocean and
from whose breathing so many innumerable universes are passing out and
entering) is also an expansion of the Supreme Lord. As stated in the

Brabma-san'ilu'ta (5.48),

yasyaika—nis’vasita—kc‘tlam athc‘walambya
jivcmti loma-vila—jc‘t jagad—anda—nc‘tthdh



visnm mahc‘m sa iha yasya kala-vis’eso
govindam c‘tdi—pmusam tam aham bhajdmi

“The Maha-Visnu, into whom all the innumerable universes enter and from
whom they come forth again simply by His breathing process, is a plenary
expansion of Krsna. Therefore I worship Govinda, Krsna, the cause of all
causes.” Therefore one should conclusively worship the personal form of Krsna
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead who has eternal bliss and knowledge.
He is the source of all forms of Visnu, He is the source of all forms of
incarnation, and He is the original Supreme Personality, as confirmed in
Bhagavad—gitc‘t.

In the Vedic literature (Gopéla-tépam‘ Upam'saa 1.1) the following statement
appears:

sac—cid—c‘manda-rﬁpc‘tya
krsnc‘tyc‘tklista—kc‘trine

namo vedanta—vedyc‘tya

gmave buddhi—sc‘tksine

“I offer my respectful obeisances unto Krsna, who has a transcendental
form of bliss, eternity and knowledge. I offer my respect to Him, because
understanding Him means understanding the Vedas and He is therefore the
supreme spiritual master.” Then it is said, krsno vai paramam daivatam: “Krsna
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” (Gopéla-tépam‘ Upam'saa 1.3) Eko vas’i
sarva—gah krsna idyah: “That one Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and He is worshipable.” Eko ’pi scm bahudhc‘t yo ’vabhc‘tti: “Krsna is
one, but He is manifested in unlimited forms and expanded incarnations.”
(Gopéla-tépam‘ Upam'saa 1.21)

The Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.1) says,

is’varah paramah krsnah

sac-cid—c‘manda—vigrahah
am‘tdir c‘tdir govindah

sarva—kc‘trana—kc‘tranam

“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is Krsna, who has a body of eternity,



knowledge and bliss. He has no beginning, for He is the beginning of
everything. He is the cause of all causes.”

Elsewhere it is said, yatrc‘watimam krsnc‘tkhyam param brahma nardkrti: “The
Supreme Absolute Truth is a person, His name is Krsna, and He sometimes
descends on this earth.” Similarly, in the Srimad-Bhagavatam we find a
description of all kinds of incarnations of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and in this list the name of Krsna also appears. But then it is said
that this Krsna is not an incarnation of God but is the original Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself (ete cams’a—kalc‘th pumsah krsnas tu bhagavc‘m
svayam).

Similarly, in Bhagavad-gitc‘t the Lord says, mattah parataram nc‘myat: “There
is nothing superior to My form as the Personality of Godhead Krsna.” He also
says elsewhere in Bhagavad—gitc‘t, aham c‘tdir hi devc‘mc‘tm: “I am the origin of all
the demigods.” And after understanding Bhagavad-gitc‘t from Krsna, Arjuna
also confirms this in the following words: param brahma param dhdma
pavitram—paramam bhavc‘m, “I now fully understand that You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, and that You are the refuge of
everything.” Therefore the universal form which Krsna showed to Arjuna is
not the original form of God. The original is the Krsna form. The universal
form, with its thousands and thousands of heads and hands, is manifest just to
draw the attention of those who have no love for God. It is not God’s original
form.

The universal form is not attractive for pure devotees, who are in love with
the Lord in different transcendental relationships. The Supreme Godhead
exchanges transcendental love in His original form of Krsna. Therefore to
Arjuna, who was so intimately related with Krsna in friendship, this form of
the universal manifestation was not pleasing; rather, it was fearful. Arjuna,
who was a constant companion of Krsna’s, must have had transcendental eyes;
he was not an ordinary man. Therefore he was not captivated by the universal
form. This form may seem wonderful to persons who are involved in elevating
themselves by fruitive activities, but to persons who are engaged in devotional
serVice the two-handed form of Krsna is the most dear.



TEXT 55

Wm:mﬁfa:l
ﬁﬁaéﬁgazamﬁﬁrwuxau

mat—karma-km mat—paramo

mad-bhaktah sahga—Uarjitah
nirvairah sarva—bhﬁtesu
yah sa mam eti pc‘mdava

SYNONYMS

mat—karma—th—engaged in doing My work; mat—paramah—considering Me
the Supreme; mat-bhaktah—engaged in My devotional service;
sahga-Uarjitah—freed from the contamination of fruitive activities and mental
speculation; nirvairah—without an enemy; sarva—bhﬁtesu—among all living
entities; yah—one who; sah—he; mc‘tm—unto Me; eti—comes; pc‘mdava—O
son of Pandu.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, he who engages in My pure devotional service, free from
the contaminations of fruitive activities and mental speculation, he who works
for Me, who makes Me the supreme goal of his life, and who is friendly to every
living being—he certainly comes to Me.

PURPORT

Anyone who wants to approach the supreme of all the Personalities of
Godhead, on the Krsnaloka planet in the spiritual sky, and be intimately
connected with the Supreme Personality, Krsna, must take this formula, as
stated by the Supreme Himself. Therefore, this verse is considered to be the
essence of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The Bhagavad-gitc‘t is a book directed to the
conditioned souls, who are engaged in the material world with the purpose of



lording it over nature and who do not know of the real, spiritual life. The
Bhagavad-gitc‘t is meant to show how one can understand his spiritual existence
and his eternal relationship with the supreme spiritual personality and to
teach one how to go back home, back to Godhead. Now here is the verse which
clearly explains the process by which one can attain success in his spiritual
activity: devotional serVice.

As far as work is concerned, one should transfer his energy entirely to
Krsna conscious activities. As stated in the Bbakti—rasﬁmrta-smdbu (2.255),

anc‘tsaktasya visayc‘m
yathc‘trham upayuﬁjatah
nirbcmdhah krsna—sambandhe
yuktam vairc‘tgyam ucyate

No work should be done by any man except in relationship to Krsna. This is
called krsna-karma. One may be engaged in various activities, but one should
not be attached to the result of his work; the result should be done only for
Him. For example, one may be engaged in business, but to transform that
activity into Krsna consciousness, one has to do business for Krsna. If Krsna is
the proprietor of the business, then Krsna should enjoy the profit of the
business. If a businessman is in possession of thousands and thousands of
dollars, and if he has to offer all this to Krsna, he can do it. This is work for
Krsna. Instead of constructing a big building for his sense gratification, he can
construct a nice temple for Krsna, and he can install the Deity of Krsna and
arrange for the Deity’s serVice, as is outlined in the authorized books of
devotional serVice. This is all krsna-karma. One should not be attached to the
result of his work, but the result should be offered to Krsna, and one should
accept as prasc‘tdam the remnants of offerings to Krsna. If one constructs a very
big building for Krsna and installs the Deity of Krsna, one is not prohibited
from living there, but it is understood that the proprietor of the building is
Krsna. That is called Krsna consciousness. If, however, one is not able to
construct a temple for Krsna, one can engage himself in cleansing the temple
of Krsna; that is also krsna-karma. One can cultivate a garden. Anyone who
has land—in India, at least, any poor man has a certain amount of land—can



utilize that for Krsna by growing ﬂowers to offer Him. One can sow tulasi
plants, because tulasi leaves are very important and Krsna has recommended
this in Bhagavad—gitc‘t. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Krsna desires that one
offer Him either a leaf, or a ﬂower, or fruit, or a little water—and by such an
offering He is satisfied. This leaf especially refers to the tulasi. So one can sow
tulasi and pour water on the plant. Thus, even the poorest man can engage in
the serVice of Krsna. These are some of the examples of how one can engage in
working for Krsna.

The word mat-pammah refers to one who considers the association of Krsna
in His supreme abode to be the highest perfection of life. Such a person does
not wish to be elevated to the higher planets such as the moon or sun or
heavenly planets, or even the highest planet of this universe, Brahmaloka. He
has no attraction for that. He is only attracted to being transferred to the
spiritual sky. And even in the spiritual sky he is not satisfied with merging into
the glowing brahmajyoti effulgence, for he wants to enter the highest spiritual
planet, namely Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana. He has full knowledge of that
planet, and therefore he is not interested in any other. As indicated by the
word mad-bhaktah, he fully engages in devotional serVice, specifically in the
nine processes of devotional engagement: hearing, chanting, remembering,
worshiping, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, offering prayers, carrying out
the orders of the Lord, making friends with Him, and surrendering everything
to Him. One can engage in all nine devotional processes, or eight, or seven, or
at least in one, and that will surely make one perfect.

The term sahga-Uarjitah is very significant. One should disassociate himself
from persons who are against Krsna. Not only are the atheistic persons against
Krsna, but so also are those who are attracted to fruitive activities and mental
speculation. Therefore the pure form of devotional serVice is described in
Bbakti-rasﬁmrta-smdbu (1.1.11) as follows:

anyabhilc‘tsitc‘t-s’ﬁnyam
jﬁc‘ma—karmc‘tdy—am‘wrtam
c‘mukﬁlyena krsnc‘mu—
s’ilanam bhaktir uttamc‘t
[Madhya 19.167]



In this verse Srila Rupa Gosvami clearly states that if anyone wants to
execute unalloyed devotional serVice, he must be freed from all kinds of
material contamination. He must be freed from the association of persons who
are addicted to fruitive activities and mental speculation. When, freed from
such unwanted association and from the contamination of material desires,
one favorably cultivates knowledge of Krsna, that is called pure devotional
service. Anukﬁlyasya sahkalpah prc‘ttikﬁlyasya varjanam (Hari—blzakti-Vilzisa
11.676). One should think of Krsna and act for Krsna favorably, not
unfavorably. Kamsa was an enemy of Krsna’s. From the very beginning of
Krsna’s birth, Kamsa planned in so many ways to kill Him, and because he was
always unsuccessful, he was always thinking of Krsna. Thus while working,
while eating and while sleeping, he was always Krsna conscious in every
respect, but that Krsna consciousness was not favorable, and therefore in spite
of his always thinking of Krsna twenty-four hours a day, he was considered a
demon, and Krsna at last killed him. Of course anyone who is killed by Krsna
attains salvation immediately, but that is not the aim of the pure devotee. The
pure devotee does not even want salvation. He does not want to be transferred
even to the highest planet, Goloka Vrndavana. His only objective is to serve
Krsna wherever he may be.

A devotee of Krsna is friendly to everyone. Therefore it is said here that he
has no enemy (nirvaimh). How is this? A devotee situated in Krsna
consciousness knows that only devotional serVice to Krsna can relieve a person
from all the problems of life. He has personal experience of this, and therefore
he wants to introduce this system, Krsna consciousness, into human society.
There are many examples in history of devotees of the Lord who risked their
lives for the spreading of God consciousness. The favorite example is Lord
Jesus Christ. He was crucified by the nondevotees, but he sacrificed his life for
spreading God consciousness. Of course, it would be superficial to understand
that he was killed. Similarly, in India also there are many examples, such as
Thakura Haridasa and Prahlada Maharaja. Why such risk? Because they
wanted to spread Krsna consciousness, and it is difficult. A Krsna conscious
person knows that if a man is suffering it is due to his forgetfulness of his
eternal relationship with Krsna. Therefore, the highest benefit one can render



to human society is relieving one’s neighbor from all material problems. In
such a way, a pure devotee is engaged in the serVice of the Lord. Now, we can
imagine how merciful Krsna is to those engaged in His serVice, risking
everything for Him. Therefore it is certain that such persons must reach the
supreme planet after leaving the body.

In summary, the universal form of Krsna, which is a temporary
manifestation, and the form of time which devours everything, and even the
form of Visnu, four-handed, have all been exhibited by Krsna. Thus Krsna is
the origin of all these manifestations. It is not that Krsna is a manifestation of
the original Uis’va-Tﬁpa, or Visnu. Krsna is the origin of all forms. There are
hundreds and thousands of Visnus, but for a devotee no form of Krsna is
important but the original form, two-handed Syamasundara. In the
Brahma-samhitc't it is stated that those who are attached to the Syamasundara
form of Krsna in love and devotion can see Him always within the heart and
cannot see anything else. One should understand, therefore, that the purport
of this Eleventh Chapter is that the form of Krsna is essential and supreme.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eleventh Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Universal F orm.

Devotional Service

 

TEXT 1

WWI
Wamﬁmqﬁml



ﬁmamﬁﬁﬁ$ﬁwﬁamw9u

arjuna uvc‘tca
evam satata—yuktc‘t ye
bhaktc‘ts wam paryupc‘tsate
ye cc‘tpy aksaram avyaktam
test‘tm ke yoga—Uittamc‘th

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; evam—thus; satata—always; yuktc‘th—engaged;
ye—those who; bhaktc‘th—devotees; tvc‘tm—You; paryupc‘tsate—properly
worship; ye—those who; ca—also; api—again; aksamm—beyond the senses;
avyaktam—the unmanifested; tesc‘tm—of them; ke—who; yoga—Uit-tamc‘th—the
most perfect in knowledge of yoga.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: Which are considered to be more perfect, those who are
always properly engaged in Your devotional service or those who worship the
impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested?

PURPORT

Krsna has now explained about the personal, the impersonal and the
universal and has described all kinds of devotees and yogis. Generally, the
transcendentalists can be divided into two classes. One is the impersonalist,
and the other is the personalist. The personalist devotee engages himself with
all energy in the serVice of the Supreme Lord. The impersonalist also engages
himself, not directly in the serVice of Krsna but in meditation on the
impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested.

We find in this chapter that of the different processes for realization of the
Absolute Truth, bhakti-yoga, devotional serVice, is the highest. If one at all
desires to have the association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then



he must take to devotional serVice.

Those who worship the Supreme Lord directly by devotional serVice are
called personalists. Those who engage themselves in meditation on the
impersonal Brahman are called impersonalists. Arjuna is here questioning
which position is better. There are different ways to realize the Absolute
Truth, but Krsna indicates in this chapter that bhakti-yoga, or devotional
serVice to Him, is the highest of all. It is the most direct, and it is the easiest
means for association with the Godhead.

In the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the Supreme Lord explained that
a living entity is not the material body; he is a spiritual spark. And the
Absolute Truth is the spiritual whole. In the Seventh Chapter He spoke of the
living entity as being part and parcel of the supreme whole and recommended
that he transfer his attention fully to the whole. Then again in the Eighth
Chapter it was said that anyone who thinks of Krsna at the time of quitting his
body is at once transferred to the spiritual sky, to the abode of Krsna. And at
the end of the Sixth Chapter the Lord clearly said that of all yogis, one who
always thinks of Krsna within himself is considered the most perfect. 80 in
practically every chapter the conclusion has been that one should be attached
to the personal form of Krsna, for that is the highest spiritual realization.

Nevertheless, there are those who are not attached to the personal form of
Krsna. They are so firmly detached that even in the preparation of
commentaries to Bhagavad-gitc‘t they want to distract other people from Krsna
and transfer all devotion to the impersonal brahmajyoti. They prefer to
meditate on the impersonal form of the Absolute Truth, which is beyond the
reach of the senses and is not manifest.

And so, factually, there are two classes of transcendentalists. Now Arjuna is
trying to settle the question of which process is easier and which of the classes
is most perfect. In other words, he is clarifying his own position because he is
attached to the personal form of Krsna. He is not attached to the impersonal
Brahman. He wants to know whether his position is secure. The impersonal
manifestation, either in this material world or in the spiritual world of the
Supreme Lord, is a problem for meditation. Actually, one cannot perfectly
conceive of the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. Therefore Arjuna



wants to say, “What is the use of such a waste of time?” Arjuna experienced in
the Eleventh Chapter that to be attached to the personal form of Krsna is best
because he could thus understand all other forms at the same time and there
was no disturbance to his love for Krsna. This important question asked of
Krsna by Arjuna will clarify the distinction between the impersonal and
personal conceptions of the Absolute Truth.

TEXT 2

WI
Wnﬁlﬁniﬁawmaﬁl
ammagﬁmwnmu

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
mayy c‘wes’ya memo ye mam
nitya—yuktc‘t upc‘tsate
s’raddhayc‘t parayopetc‘ts
te me yuktatamc‘t matc‘th

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi—upon
Me; c‘wes’ya—fixing; manah—the mind; ye—those who; mc‘tm—Me;
nitya—always; yuktc‘th—engaged; upc‘tsate—worship; s’raddhayc‘t—with faith;
parayc‘t—transcendental; upetc‘th—endowed; te—they; me—by Me;
yukta-tamc‘th—most perfect in yoga; matc‘th—are considered.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Those who fix their minds on
My personal form and are always engaged in worshiping Me with great and
transcendental faith are considered by Me to be most perfect.



PURPORT

In answer to Arjuna’s question, Krsna clearly says that he who concentrates
upon His personal form and who worships Him with faith and devotion is to be
considered most perfect in yoga. For one in such Krsna consciousness there are
no material activities, because everything is done for Krsna. A pure devotee is
constantly engaged. Sometimes he chants, sometimes he hears or reads books
about Krsna, or sometimes he cooks prasc‘tdam or goes to the marketplace to
purchase something for Krsna, or sometimes he washes the temple or the
dishes—whatever he does, he does not let a single moment pass without
devoting his activities to Krsna. Such action is in full samadhi.

TEXTS 3—4

QEWWWWI
WHWWHBH
WWWWH
?rmgaﬁrmﬁaaéiﬁfﬁémueu

ye tv aksaram anirdes’yam
avyaktam paryupc‘tsate
sarvatra—gam acintyam ca
kata-stham acalam dhruvam

sanniyamyendriya-grc‘tmam

sarvatra sama—buddhayah
te prc‘tpnuvanti mam eva
sarva—bhﬁta—hite ratc‘th

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; tu—but; aksamm—that which is beyond the perception of the
senses; anirdes’yam—indefinite; avyaktam—unmanifested;



paryupc‘tsate—completely engage in worshiping; sarvatra—gam—all-pervading;
acintyam—inconceivable; ca—also; kata—stham—unchanging;
acalam—immovable; dhruvam—fixed; sanniyamya—controlling;
indriya—grc‘tmam—all the senses; sarvatra—everywhere;
sama—buddhayah—equally disposed; te—they; prc‘tpnuvanti—achieve;
mc‘tm—Me; eva—certainly; sarva—bhﬁta—hite—for the welfare of all living
entities; mtt‘th—engaged.

TRANSLATION

But those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies beyond the
perception of the senses, the all-pervading, inconceivable, unchanging, fixed and
immovable—the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth—by controlling
the various senses and being equally disposed to everyone, such persons,
engaged in the welfare of all, at last achieve Me.

PURPORT

Those who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, Krsna, but who
attempt to achieve the same goal by an indirect process, also ultimately
achieve the same goal, Sri Krsna. “After many births the man of wisdom seeks
refuge in Me, knowing that Vasudeva is all.” When a person comes to full
knowledge after many births, he surrenders unto Lord Krsna. If one
approaches the Godhead by the method mentioned in this verse, he has to
control the senses, render serVice to everyone and engage in the welfare of all
beings. It is inferred that one has to approach Lord Krsna, otherwise there is
no perfect realization. Often there is much penance involved before one fully
surrenders unto Him.

In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul, one has to
cease the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working, etc. Then one
comes to understand that the Supreme Soul is present everywhere. Realizing
this, one envies no living entity—he sees no difference between man and
animal because he sees soul only, not the outer covering. But for the common
man, this method of impersonal realization is very difficult.



TEXT 5

wsmmwmml
mfgwﬁézﬁ W n 9 u

kles’o ’dhikataras test‘tm

avyaktdsakta—cetasc‘tm
avyaktc‘t hi gatir duhkham

dehavadbhir avc‘tpyate

SYNONYMS

kles’ah—trouble; adhika—tarah—very much; tesc‘tm—of them; avyakta—to the
unmanifested; c'tsakta—attached; cetasc‘tm—of those whose minds;
avyaktc‘t—toward the unmanifested; hi—certainly; gatih—progress;
duhkham—with trouble; deha—Uadbhih—by the embodied; avc‘tpyate—is
achieved.

TRANSLATION

For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal feature
of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To make progress in that
discipline is always difficult for those who are embodied.

PURPORT

The group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the inconceivable,
unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord are called jﬁc‘ma-yogis,
and persons who are in full Krsna consciousness, engaged in devotional serVice
to the Lord, are called bhakti-yogis. Now, here the difference between
jﬁc‘ma—yoga and bhakti-yoga is definitely expressed. The process of jﬁc‘ma-yoga,
although ultimately bringing one to the same goal, is very troublesome,
whereas the path of bhakti-yoga, the process of being in direct serVice to the



Supreme Personality of Godhead, is easier and is natural for the embodied
soul. The individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is very difficult
for him to simply theoretically understand that he is not the body. Therefore,
the bhakti-yogi accepts the Deity of Krsna as worshipable because there is some
bodily conception fixed in the mind, which can thus be applied. Of course,
worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form within the temple
is not idol worship. There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may
be saguna and nirguna—of the Supreme possessing or not possessing attributes.
Worship of the Deity in the temple is saguna worship, for the Lord is
represented by material qualities. But the form of the Lord, though represented
by material qualities such as stone, wood or oil paint, is not actually material.
That is the absolute nature of the Supreme Lord.

A crude example may be given here. We may find some mailboxes on the
street, and if we post our letters in those boxes, they will naturally go to their
destination without difficulty. But any old box, or an imitation which we may
find somewhere but which is not authorized by the post office, will not do the
work. Similarly, God has an authorized representation in the Deity form,
which is called arcc‘t—Uigraha. This arcc‘t-vigraha is an incarnation of the
Supreme Lord. God will accept serVice through that form. The Lord is
omnipotent, all-powerful; therefore, by His incarnation as arcc‘t-Uigmha He can
accept the services of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the man in
conditioned life.

So for a devotee there is no difficulty in approaching the Supreme
immediately and directly, but for those who are following the impersonal way
to spiritual realization the path is difficult. They have to understand the
unmanifested representation of the Supreme through such Vedic literatures as
the Upcmisads, and they have to learn the language, understand the
nonperceptual feelings, and realize all these processes. This is not very easy for
a common man. A person in Krsna consciousness, engaged in devotional
serVice, simply by the guidance of the bona fide spiritual master, simply by
offering regulative obeisances unto the Deity, simply by hearing the glories of
the Lord, and simply by eating the remnants of foodstuffs offered to the Lord,
realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead very easily. There is no doubt



that the impersonalists are unnecessarily taking a troublesome path with the
risk of not realizing the Absolute Truth at the ultimate end. But the
personalist, without any risk, trouble or difficulty, approaches the Supreme
Personality directly. A similar passage appears in Srimad-Bhagavatam. It is
stated there that if one ultimately has to surrender unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (this surrendering process is called bhakti), but instead
takes the trouble to understand what is Brahman and what is not Brahman
and spends his whole life in that way, the result is simply troublesome.
Therefore it is advised here that one should not take up this troublesome path
of self-realization, because there is uncertainty in the ultimate result.

A living entity is eternally an individual soul, and if he wants to merge into
the spiritual whole, he may accomplish the realization of the eternal and
knowledgeable aspects of his original nature, but the blissful portion is not
realized. By the grace of some devotee, such a transcendentalist, highly learned
in the process of jﬁc‘ma-yoga, may come to the point of bhakti—yoga, or
devotional serVice. At that time, long practice in impersonalism also becomes a
source of trouble, because he cannot give up the idea. Therefore an embodied
soul is always in difficulty with the unmanifest, both at the time of practice
and at the time of realization. Every living soul is partially independent, and
one should know for certain that this unmanifested realization is against the
nature of his spiritual blissful self. One should not take up this process. For
every individual living entity the process of Krsna consciousness, which entails
full engagement in devotional serVice, is the best way. If one wants to ignore
this devotional serVice, there is the danger of turning to atheism. Thus the
process of centering attention on the unmanifested, the inconceivable, which
is beyond the approach of the senses, as already expressed in this verse, should
never be encouraged at any time, especially in this age. It is not advised by

Lord Krsna.

TEXTS 6—7

ﬁgaafﬁrﬁﬁrtrﬁrammu
Wiaﬁﬁﬁnfwm-‘dsqmﬁusu



WWWI
wﬁﬁﬁtmﬁmﬁﬁlaﬁmuwu

ye tu sarvc‘mi karmani
mayi scmnyasya mat—parc‘th
cmanyenaiva yogena
mam dhyc‘tycmta upc‘tsate

test‘tm aham samuddhartc‘t
mrtyu—samsc‘tra-sc‘tgarc‘tt
bhavc‘tmi ha circ‘tt pc‘trtha
mayy c‘wes’ita—cetasc‘tm

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; tu—but; sarvc‘mi—all; karmani—activities; mayi—unto Me;
sannyasya—giving up; mat—parc‘th—being attached to Me; ananyena—without
division; eva—certainly; yogena—by practice of such bhakti—yoga; mc‘tm—upon
Me; dhyc‘tyantah—meditating; upc‘tsate—worship; tesc‘tm—of them; aham—I;
samuddhartc‘t—the deliverer; mrtyu—of death; samsc‘tra—in material existence;
sc‘tgarc‘tt—from the ocean; bhavc‘tmi—I become; na—not; circ‘tt—after a long
time; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; mayi—upon Me; c‘wes’ita—fixed; cetasc‘tm—of
those whose minds.

TRANSLATION

But those who worship Me, giving up all their activities unto Me and being
devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and always
meditating upon Me, having fixed their minds upon Me, 0 son of Prtha—for
them I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and death.

PURPORT

It is explicitly stated here that the devotees are very fortunate to be
delivered very soon from material existence by the Lord. In pure devotional



serVice one comes to the realization that God is great and that the individual
soul is subordinate to Him. His duty is to render serVice to the Lord—and if he
does not, then he will render serVice to mc‘tyc't.

As stated before, the Supreme Lord can be appreciated only by devotional
serVice. Therefore, one should be fully devoted. One should fix his mind fully
on Krsna in order to achieve Him. One should work only for Krsna. It does not
matter in what kind of work one engages, but that work should be done only
for Krsna. That is the standard of devotional serVice. The devotee does not
desire any achievement other than pleasing the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. His life’s mission is to please Krsna, and he can sacrifice everything
for Krsna’s satisfaction, just as Arjuna did in the Battle of Kuruksetra. The
process is very simple: one can devote himself in his occupation and engage at
the same time in chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Such transcendental
chanting attracts the devotee to the Personality of Godhead.

The Supreme Lord herein promises that without delay He will deliver a
pure devotee thus engaged from the ocean of material existence. Those who
are advanced in yoga practice can willfully transfer the soul to whatever planet
they like by the yoga process, and others take the opportunity in various ways,
but as far as the devotee is concerned, it is clearly stated here that the Lord
Himself takes him. The devotee does not need to wait to become very
experienced in order to transfer himself to the spiritual sky.

In the Vart‘tha Purc‘ma this verse appears:

nayc‘tmi paramam sthc‘mam
arcir—c‘tdi-gatim vinc‘t
gamda-skandham c‘tropya
yatheccham anivc‘tritah

The purport of this verse is that a devotee does not need to practice
astc'mga-yoga in order to transfer his soul to the spiritual planets. The
responsibility is taken by the Supreme Lord Himself. He clearly states here
that He Himself becomes the deliverer. A child is completely cared for by his
parents, and thus his position is secure. Similarly, a devotee does not need to



endeavor to transfer himself by yoga practice to other planets. Rather, the
Supreme Lord, by His great mercy, comes at once, riding on His bird carrier
Garuda, and at once delivers the devotee from material existence. Although a
man who has fallen in the ocean may struggle very hard and may be very
expert in swimming, he cannot save himself. But if someone comes and picks
him up from the water, then he is easily rescued. Similarly, the Lord picks up
the devotee from this material existence. One simply has to practice the easy
process of Krsna consciousness and fully engage himself in devotional serVice.
Any intelligent man should always prefer the process of devotional serVice to
all other paths. In the Nc'trc'tyaniya this is confirmed as follows:

yc‘t vai sc‘tdhana-sampattih
purusc‘trtha—catustaye
tayc‘t vinc‘t tad apnoti
naro ndrc‘tyanc‘ts’rayah

The purport of this verse is that one should not engage in the different
processes of fruitive activity or cultivate knowledge by the mental speculative
process. One who is devoted to the Supreme Personality can attain all the
benefits derived from other yogic processes, speculation, rituals, sacrifices,
charities, etc. That is the specific benediction of devotional serVice.

Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna—Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare—a
devotee of the Lord can approach the supreme destination easily and happily,
but this destination cannot be approached by any other process of religion.

The conclusion of Bhagavad-gitc‘t is stated in the Eighteenth Chapter:

sarva—dharmc‘m parityajya
mam ekam s’aranam waja
aham wam sarva-pc‘tpebhyo
moksayisyc‘tmi mc‘t s’ucah
[Bg. 18.66]

One should give up all other processes of self-realization and simply execute
devotional serVice in Krsna consciousness. That will enable one to reach the



highest perfection of life. There is no need for one to consider the sinful
actions of his past life, because the Supreme Lord fully takes charge of him.
Therefore one should not futilely try to deliver himself in spiritual realization.
Let everyone take shelter of the supreme omnipotent Godhead, Krsna. That is
the highest perfection of life.

TEXT 8

Wmamnﬁaﬁﬁﬁml
WW$$§3W=II=II

mayy eva mama c‘tdhatsva
mayi buddhim nives’aya
nivasisyasi mayy eva
ata mdhvam ha sams’ayah

SYNONYMS

mayi—upon Me; eva—certainly; manah—mind; c‘tdhatsva—fix; mayi—upon
Me; buddhim—intelligence; nives’aya—apply; nivasisyasi—you will live;
mayi—in Me; eva—certainly; atah mdhvam—thereafter; na—never;
sams’ayah—doubt.

TRANSLATION

Just fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live in Me always, without a

doubt.

PURPORT

One who is engaged in Lord Krsna’s devotional serVice lives in a direct
relationship with the Supreme Lord, so there is no doubt that his position is
transcendental from the very beginning. A devotee does not live on the



material plane—he lives in Krsna. The holy name of the Lord and the Lord
are nondifferent; therefore when a devotee chants Hare Krsna, Krsna and His
internal potency are dancing on the tongue of the devotee. When he offers
Krsna food, Krsna directly accepts these eatables, and the devotee becomes
Krsna-ized by eating the remnants. One who does not engage in such serVice
cannot understand how this is so, although this is a process recommended in
the Bhagavad-gitc‘t and in other Vedic literatures.

TEXT 9

aaﬁﬁmmﬁaﬁﬁtrﬁrml
Wﬂmﬁwﬁmueu

atha cittam samadhc‘ttum
ha s’aknosi mayi sthiram
abhyc‘tsa—yogena tato
mam icchc‘tptum dhanaﬁjaya

SYNONYMS

atha—if, therefore; cittam—mind; same‘tdhc‘ttum—to fix; na—not;
s’aknosi—you are able; mayi—upon Me; sthiram—steadily; abhyc‘tsa—yogena—by
the practice of devotional service; tatah—then; mc‘tm—Me; icchc‘t—desire;
c‘tptum—to get; dhanam-jaya—O winner of wealth, Arjuna.

TRANSLATION

My dear Arjuna, 0 winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me
without deviation, then follow the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga. In this
way develop a desire to attain Me.

PURPORT

In this verse, two different processes of bhakti-yoga are indicated. The first



applies to one who has actually developed an attachment for Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by transcendental love. And the other is for
one who has not developed an attachment for the Supreme Person by
transcendental love. For this second class there are different prescribed rules
and regulations one can follow to be ultimately elevated to the stage of
attachment to Krsna.

Bhakti-yoga is the purification of the senses. At the present moment in
material existence the senses are always impure, being engaged in sense
gratification. But by the practice of bhakti-yoga these senses can become
purified, and in the purified state they come directly in contact with the
Supreme Lord. In this material existence, I may be engaged in some serVice to
some master, but I don’t really lovingly serve my master. I simply serve to get
some money. And the master also is not in love; he takes serVice from me and
pays me. So there is no question of love. But for spiritual life, one must be
elevated to the pure stage of love. That stage of love can be achieved by
practice of devotional serVice, performed with the present senses.

This love of God is now in a dormant state in everyone’s heart. And, there,
love of God is manifested in different ways, but it is contaminated by material
association. Now the heart has to be purified of the material association, and
that dormant, natural love for Krsna has to be revived. That is the whole
process.

To practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga one should, under the
guidance of an expert spiritual master, follow certain principles: one should
rise early in the morning, take bath, enter the temple and offer prayers and
chant Hare Krsna, then collect ﬂowers to offer to the Deity, cook foodstuffs to
offer to the Deity, take prasc‘tdam, and so on. There are various rules and
regulations which one should follow. And one should constantly hear
Bhagavad-gitc‘t and Srimad-Bhagavatam from pure devotees. This practice can
help anyone rise to the level of love of God, and then he is sure of his progress
into the spiritual kingdom of God. This practice of bhakti-yoga, under the rules
and regulations, with the direction of a spiritual master, will surely bring one
to the stage of love of God.



TEXT 10

awrﬁscqanaﬁSfEmc—mrﬁqﬁlnal
WWW W || 90 ||

abhyc‘tse ’py asamartho ’si
mat—karma—paramo bhava
mad—artham api karmani
kurvcm siddhim ave‘tpsyasi

SYNONYMS

abhyc‘tse—in practice; api—even if; asamarthah—unable; asi—you are;
mat—karma—My work; paramah—dedicated to; bhava—become;
mat—artham—for My sake; api—even; karmc‘mi—work; kurvan—performing;
siddhim—perfection; avdpsyasi—you will achieve.

TRANSLATION

If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to work
for Me, because by working for Me you will come to the perfect stage.

PURPORT

One who is not able even to practice the regulative principles of
bhakti-yoga, under the guidance of a spiritual master, can still be drawn to this
perfectional stage by working for the Supreme Lord. How to do this work has
already been explained in the fifty-fifth verse of the Eleventh Chapter. One
should be sympathetic to the propagation of Krsna consciousness. There are
many devotees who are engaged in the propagation of Krsna consciousness,
and they require help. So, even if one cannot directly practice the regulative
principles of bhakti-yoga, he can try to help such work. Every endeavor
requires land, capital, organization and labor. Just as in business one requires a
place to stay, some capital to use, some labor and some organization to expand,



so the same is required in the serVice of Krsna. The only difference is that in
materialism one works for sense gratification. The same work, however, can be
performed for the satisfaction of Krsna, and that is spiritual activity. If one has
sufficient money, he can help in building an office or temple for propagating
Krsna consciousness. Or he can help with publications. There are various
fields of activity, and one should be interested in such activities. If one cannot
sacrifice the results of his activities, the same person can still sacrifice some
percentage to propagate Krsna consciousness. This voluntary service to the
cause of Krsna consciousness will help one to rise to a higher state of love for
God, whereupon one becomes perfect.

TEXT 11

aWSEr aﬁnﬁwtﬁazl
WWW aa: 55 W" 99 ||

athaitad apy as’akto ’si
kartum mad—yogam c‘ts’ritah
sarva—karma—phala—tyc‘tgam

tatah kuru yatc‘ttmavc‘m

SYNONYMS

atha—even though; etat—this; api—also; as’aktah—unable; asi—you are;
kartum—to perform; mat—unto Me; yogam—in devotional service;
c‘ts’ritah—taking refuge; sarva-karma—of all activities; phala—of the results;
tyc‘tgam—renunciation; tatah—then; kuru—do; yata—c‘ttma-vc‘m—self-situated.

TRANSLATION

If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness of Me, then try to
act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.

PURPORT



It may be that one is unable even to sympathize with the activities of Krsna
consciousness because of social, familial or religious considerations or because
of some other impediments. If one attaches himself directly to the activities of
Krsna consciousness, there may be objections from family members, or so many
other difficulties. For one who has such a problem, it is advised that he
sacrifice the accumulated result of his activities to some good cause. Such
procedures are described in the Vedic rules. There are many descriptions of
sacrifices and special functions of punya, or special work in which the result of
one’s previous action may be applied. Thus one may gradually become elevated
to the state of knowledge. It is also found that when one who is not even
interested in the activities of Krsna consciousness gives charity to some
hospital or some other social institution, he gives up the hard-earned results of
his activities. That is also recommended here because by the practice of giving
up the fruits of one’s activities one is sure to purify his mind gradually, and in
that purified stage of mind one becomes able to understand Krsna
consciousness. Of course Krsna consciousness is not dependent on any other
experience, because Krsna consciousness itself can purify one’s mind, but if
there are impediments to accepting Krsna consciousness, one may try to give
up the results of his actions. In that respect, social serVice, community serVice,
national serVice, sacrifice for one’s country, etc., may be accepted so that some
day one may come to the stage of pure devotional serVice to the Supreme Lord.
In Bbagavad—gita (18.46) we find it is stated, yatah pravrttir bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm: if one
decides to sacrifice for the supreme cause, even if he does not know that the
supreme cause is Krsna, he will come gradually to understand that Krsna is the
supreme cause by the sacrificial method.

TEXT 12

s’reyo hi jﬁc‘mam abhyc‘tsc‘tj
jﬁc‘mc‘td dhyc‘mam vis’isyate



dhyc‘mc‘tt karma-phala—tyc‘tgas
tyc‘tgc‘tc chc‘mtir cmantaram

SYNONYMS

s’reyah—better; hi—certainly; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; abhyc‘tsc‘tt—than practice;
jﬁc‘mc‘tt—than knowledge; dhyc‘mam—meditation; vis’isyate—is considered
better; dhyc‘mc‘tt—than meditation; karma—phala-tyc‘tgah—renunciation of the
results of fruitive action; tyc'tgc'tt—by such renunciation; s’c‘mtih—peace;
anantaram—thereafter.

TRANSLATION

If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the cultivation of
knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, is meditation, and better than
meditation is renunciation of the fruits of action, for by such renunciation one
can attain peace of mind.

PURPORT

As mentioned in the previous verses, there are two kinds of devotional
serVice: the way of regulative principles and the way of full attachment in love
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those who are actually not able to
follow the principles of Krsna consciousness it is better to cultivate knowledge,
because by knowledge one can be able to understand his real position.
Gradually knowledge will develop to the point of meditation. By meditation
one can be able to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by a
gradual process. There are processes which make one understand that one
himself is the Supreme, and that sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable
to engage in devotional serVice. If one is not able to meditate in such a way,
then there are prescribed duties, as enjoined in the Vedic literature, for the
brc‘thmanas, ksatriyas, vais’yas and s’ﬁdras, which we shall find in the last chapter
of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. But in all cases, one should give up the result or fruits of
labor; this means to employ the result of karma for some good cause.



In summary, to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the highest
goal, there are two processes: one process is by gradual development, and the
other process is direct. Devotional serVice in Krsna consciousness is the direct
method, and the other method involves renouncing the fruits of one’s
activities. Then one can come to the stage of knowledge, then to the stage of
meditation, then to the stage of understanding the Supersoul, and then to the
stage of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One may take either the
step-by-step process or the direct path. The direct process is not possible for
everyone; therefore the indirect process is also good. It is, however, to be
understood that the indirect process is not recommended for Arjuna, because
he is already at the stage of loving devotional serVice to the Supreme Lord. It is
for others, who are not at this stage; for them the gradual process of
renunciation, knowledge, meditation and realization of the Supersoul and
Brahman should be followed. But as far as Bhagavad-gitc‘t is concerned, it is the
direct method that is stressed. Everyone is advised to take to the direct method
and surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.

TEXTS 13—14

ﬂagraéﬁmiﬁazwqaal
WW: angzlazila: an?" 93 u

aﬁszmﬁvﬁaﬁmagﬁauzl
meﬁﬁmuwu

advestc‘t sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm
maitrah karuna eva ca
nirmamo nirahahkc‘trah
sama—duhkha-sukhah ksami

santustah satatam yogi
yatc‘ttmc‘t drdha-nis’cayah
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir



yo mad-bhaktah set me priyah

SYNONYMS

advestc‘t—nonenvious; sarva-bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm—toward all living entities;
maitrah—friendly; karunah—kindly; eva—certainly; ca—also;
nirmamah—with no sense of proprietorship; nirahahkc‘trah—without false ego;
sama—equal; duhkha—in distress; sukhah—and happiness; ksami—forgiving;
santustah—satisfied; satatam—always; yogi—one engaged in devotion;
yata—c‘ttmc‘t—self-controlled; drdha—nis’cayah—with determination; mayi—upon
Me; arpita—engaged; manah—mind; buddhih—and intelligence; yah—one
who; mat—bhaktah—My devotee; sah—he; me—to Me; priyah—dear.

TRANSLATION

One who is not envious but is a kind friend to all living entities, who does
not think himself a proprietor and is free from false ego, who is equal in both
happiness and distress, who is tolerant, always satisfied, self-controlled, and
engaged in devotional service with determination, his mind and intelligence
fixed on Me—such a devotee of Mine is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

Coming again to the point of pure devotional serVice, the Lord is describing
the transcendental qualifications of a pure devotee in these two verses. A pure
devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances. Nor is he envious of anyone.
Nor does a devotee become his enemy’s enemy; he thinks, “This person is
acting as my enemy due to my own past misdeeds. So it is better to suffer than
to protest.” In the grimad-Bbégavatam (10.148) it is stated: tat te ’nukampc'tm
susamiksamc‘mo bhuﬁjc‘ma evc‘ttma—krtam vipe‘tkam. Whenever a devotee is in
distress or has fallen into difficulty, he thinks that it is the Lord’s mercy upon
him. He thinks, “Thanks to my past misdeeds I should suffer far, far greater
than I am suffering now. So it is by the mercy of the Supreme Lord that I am
not getting all the punishment I am due. I am just getting a little, by the mercy



of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.” Therefore he is always calm, quiet
and patient, despite many distressful conditions. A devotee is also always kind
to everyone, even to his enemy. Nirmama means that a devotee does not
attach much importance to the pains and trouble pertaining to the body
because he knows perfectly well that he is not the material body. He does not
identify with the body; therefore he is freed from the conception of false ego
and is equipoised in happiness and distress. He is tolerant, and he is satisfied
with whatever comes by the grace of the Supreme Lord. He does not endeavor
much to achieve something with great difficulty; therefore he is always joyful.
He is a completely perfect mystic because he is fixed in the instructions
received from the spiritual master, and because his senses are controlled he is
determined. He is not swayed by false arguments, because no one can lead him
from the fixed determination of devotional serVice. He is fully conscious that
Krsna is the eternal Lord, so no one can disturb him. All these qualifications
enable him to fix his mind and intelligence entirely on the Supreme Lord.
Such a standard of devotional serVice is undoubtedly very rare, but a devotee
becomes situated in that stage by following the regulative principles of
devotional serVice. Furthermore, the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear
to Him, for the Lord is always pleased with all his activities in full Krsna
consciousness.

TEXT 15

WWWEHH
Wmaaﬁfﬁwwu

yasmc‘m nodvijate loko

lokdn nodvijate ca yah
harsc‘tmarsa—bhayodvegair
mukto yah sa ca me priyah

SYNONYMS



yasmc‘tt—from whom; na—never; udvijate—are agitated; lokah—people;
lokdt—from people; na—never; udvijate—is disturbed; ca—also; yah—anyone
who; harsa—from happiness; amarsa—distress; bhaya—fear; udvegaih—and
anxiety; muktah—freed; yah—who; sah—anyone; ca—also; me—to Me;
priyah—very dear.

TRANSLATION

He for whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by
anyone, who is equipoised in happiness and distress, fear and anxiety, is very
dear to Me.

PURPORT

A few of a devotee’s qualifications are further being described. No one is
put into difficulty, anxiety, fearfulness or dissatisfaction by such a devotee.
Since a devotee is kind to everyone, he does not act in such a way as to put
others into anxiety. At the same time, if others try to put a devotee into
anxiety, he is not disturbed. It is by the grace of the Lord that he is so practiced
that he is not disturbed by any outward disturbance. Actually because a
devotee is always engrossed in Krsna consciousness and engaged in devotional
serVice, such material circumstances cannot move him. Generally a
materialistic person becomes very happy when there is something for his sense
gratification and his body, but when he sees that others have something for
their sense gratification and he hasn’t, he is sorry and envious. When he is
expecting some retaliation from an enemy, he is in a state of fear, and when he
cannot successfully execute something he becomes dejected. A devotee who is
always transcendental to all these disturbances is very dear to Krsna.

TEXT 16

Wazﬁﬁla‘awm‘ﬁrmazl
aaknwﬁawﬁa‘rmzaﬁfhuzumu



cmapeksah s’ucir daksa
udc‘tsino gata—vyathah
sarvc‘trambha—parityc‘tgi

yo mad-bhaktah set me priyah

SYNONYMS

anapeksah—neutral; s’ucih—pure; daksah—expert; udc‘tsinah—free from care;
gata-vyathah—freed from all distress; sarva—c‘trambha—of all endeavors;
parityc‘tgi—renouncer; yah—anyone who; mat—bhaktah—My devotee; sah—he;
me—to Me; priyah—very dear.

TRANSLATION

My devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of activities, who is
pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains, and not striving for some result,
is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

Money may be offered to a devotee, but he should not struggle to acquire it.
If automatically, by the grace of the Supreme, money comes to him, he is not
agitated. Naturally a devotee takes a bath at least twice in a day and rises early
in the morning for devotional serVice. Thus he is naturally clean both inwardly
and outwardly. A devotee is always expert because he fully knows the essence
of all activities of life and he is convinced of the authoritative scriptures. A
devotee never takes the part of a particular party; therefore he is carefree. He
is never pained, because he is free from all designations; he knows that his
body is a designation, so if there are some bodily pains, he is free. The pure
devotee does not endeavor for anything which is against the principles of
devotional serVice. For example, constructing a big building requires great
energy, and a devotee does not take to such business if it does not benefit him
by advancing his devotional serVice. He may construct a temple for the Lord,
and for that he may take all kinds of anxiety, but he does not construct a big



house for his personal relations.

TEXT 17

ﬁﬁmﬁﬁaﬁﬁsﬁaﬁrﬁmaﬁl
NWWmﬁﬁmumu

yo ha hrsyati ha dvesti

ha s’ocati ha kc‘mksati

s’ubhc‘ts’ubha—parityc‘tgi
bhaktimc‘m yah sa me priyah

SYNONYMS

yah—one who; na—never; hrsyati—takes pleasure; na—never;
dvesti—grieves; na—never; s’ocati—laments; na—never; kc‘mksati—desires;
s’ubha—of the auspicious; as’ubha—and the inauspicious; parityc'tgi—renouncer;
bhakti—mc‘m—devotee; yah—one who; sah—he is; me—to Me; priyah—dear.

TRANSLATION

One who neither rejoices nor grieves, who neither laments nor desires, and
who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things—such a devotee is very
dear to Me.

PURPORT

A pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and loss,
nor is he very much anxious to get a son or disciple, nor is he distressed by not
getting them. If he loses anything which is very dear to him, he does not
lament. Similarly, if he does not get what he desires, he is not distressed. He is
transcendental in the face of all kinds of auspicious, inauspicious and sinful
activities. He is prepared to accept all kinds of risks for the satisfaction of the
Supreme Lord. Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of his devotional



serVice. Such a devotee is very dear to Krsna.

TEXTS 18—19

m:nﬁafﬁéaammqnm’rzl
W83 an: 89813813: u 9= u

WWWWQHWI
szmﬁfﬁrmzuﬁu

samah s’atrau ca mitre ca
tathd mdm‘tpamc‘mayoh

s’itosna—sukha—duhkhesu
samah sahga—vivarjitah

tulya—nindt‘t—stutir mauni
scmtusto yena kenacit
aniketah sthira—matir

bhaktimc‘m me priyo narah

SYNONYMS

samah—equal; s’atrau—to an enemy; ca—also; mitre—to a friend; ca—also;
tathc‘t—so; mc‘ma—in honor; apamc‘mayoh—and dishonor; s’ita—in cold;
usna—heat; sukha—happiness; duhkhesu—and distress; samah—equipoised;
sahga—vivarjitah—free from all association; tulya—equal; nindc‘t—in
defamation; stutih—and repute; mauni—silent; santustah—satisfied; yena
kenacit—with anything; aniketah—having no residence; sthira—fixed;
matih—determination; bhakti-mc‘m—engaged in devotion; me—to Me;
priyah—dear; narah—a man.

TRANSLATION

One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and
dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame and infamy, who is always



free from contaminating association, always silent and satisfied with anything,
who doesn’t care for any residence, who is fixed in knowledge and who is
engaged in devotional service—such a person is very dear to Me.

PURPORT

A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is praised
and sometimes one is defamed; that is the nature of human society. But a
devotee is always transcendental to artificial fame and infamy, distress or
happiness. He is very patient. He does not speak of anything but the topics
about Krsna; therefore he is called silent. Silent does not mean that one should
not speak; silent means that one should not speak nonsense. One should speak
only of essentials, and the most essential speech for the devotee is to speak for
the sake of the Supreme Lord. A devotee is happy in all conditions; sometimes
he may get very palatable foodstuffs, sometimes not, but he is satisfied. Nor
does he care for any residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a
tree, and he may sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted to
neither. He is called fixed because he is fixed in his determination and
knowledge. We may find some repetition in the descriptions of the
qualifications of a devotee, but this is just to emphasize the fact that a devotee
must acquire all these qualifications. Without good qualifications, one cannot
be a pure devotee. Harc‘w abhaktasya kuto mahad—gunc‘th: one who is not a
devotee has no good qualification. One who wants to be recognized as a
devotee should develop the good qualifications. Of course he does not
extraneously endeavor to acquire these qualifications, but engagement in
Krsna consciousness and devotional serVice automatically helps him develop
them.

TEXT 20

ﬁgunﬁﬁfﬁdaaﬁekqﬁqmﬁl
Wmmsaﬁaﬁﬁmzuaou



ye tu dharmc‘tmrtam idam
yathoktam paryupc‘tsate

s’raddadhc‘mc‘t mat—paramc‘t

bhaktc‘ts te ’tiva me priyah

SYNONYMS

ye—those who; tu—but; dharma—of religion; amrtam—nectar; idam—this;
yathc‘t—as; uktam—said; paryupc‘tsate—completely engage;
s’raddadhc‘mc‘th—with faith; mat—paramc‘th—taking Me, the Supreme Lord, as
everything; bhaktc‘th—devotees; te—they; ativa—very, very; me—to Me;
priyah—dear.

TRANSLATION

Those who follow this imperishable path of devotional service and who
completely engage themselves with faith, making Me the supreme goal, are very,
very dear to Me.

PURPORT

In this chapter, from verse 2 through the end—from mayy c‘wes’ya memo ye
mam (“fixing the mind on Me”) through ye tu dharmc‘tmrtam idam (“this
religion of eternal engagement”)—the Supreme Lord has explained the
processes of transcendental serVice for approaching Him. Such processes are
very dear to the Lord, and He accepts a person engaged in them. The question
of who is better—one who is engaged in the path of impersonal Brahman or
one who is engaged in the personal serVice of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead—was raised by Arjuna, and the Lord replied to him so explicitly that
there is no doubt that devotional serVice to the Personality of Godhead is the
best of all processes of spiritual realization. In other words, in this chapter it is
decided that through good association one develops attachment for pure
devotional serVice and thereby accepts a bona fide spiritual master and from
him begins to hear and chant and observe the regulative principles of



devotional serVice with faith, attachment and devotion and thus becomes
engaged in the transcendental serVice of the Lord. This path is recommended
in this chapter; therefore there is no doubt that devotional serVice is the only
absolute path for self-realization, for the attainment of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The impersonal conception of the Supreme Absolute
Truth, as described in this chapter, is recommended only up to the time one
surrenders himself for self-realization. In other words, as long as one does not
have the chance to associate with a pure devotee, the impersonal conception
may be beneficial. In the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth one
works without fruitive result, meditates and cultivates knowledge to
understand spirit and matter. This is necessary as long as one is not in the
association of a pure devotee. Fortunately, if one develops directly a desire to
engage in Krsna consciousness in pure devotional serVice, he does not need to
undergo step-by-step improvements in spiritual realization. Devotional serVice,
as described in the middle siX chapters of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, is more congenial.
One need not bother about materials to keep body and soul together, because
by the grace of the Lord everything is carried out automatically.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Twelfth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Devotional Service.

 

Nature, the Enjoyer, and Consciousness

TEXTS 1—2
31$ 331a



Waniﬁaéa‘éaaﬁaal
aﬁéﬁahalnu
'aﬁiﬁﬁmﬁaﬁaﬁnﬂaﬁl
Qaa‘raﬁreimgzéaagﬁraaazuqu

arjuna uvc‘tca
prakrtim purusam caiva
ksetram ksetra—jﬁam eva ca
etad veditum icchc‘tmi
jﬁc‘mam jﬁeyam ca kes’ava
s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
idam s’ariram kaunteya
ksetram ity abhidhiyate
etad yo vetti tam prc‘thuh
ksetra—jﬁa iti tad—vidah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; prakrtim—nature; purusam—the enjoyer;
ca—also; eva—certainly; ksetram—the field; ksetra-jﬁam—the knower of the
field; eva—certainly; ca—also; etat—all this; veditum—to understand;
icchc‘tmi—I wish; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; jﬁeyam—the object of knowledge;
ca—also; kes’aUa—O Krsna; s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Personality of Godhead
said; idam—this; s’ariram—body; kaunteya—O son of Kunti; ksetram—the
field; iti—thus; abhidhiyate—is called; etat—this; yah—one who; vetti—knows;
tam—he; prc‘thuh—is called; ksetra-jﬁah—the knower of the field; iti—thus;
tat-Uidah—by those who know this.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O my dear Krsna, I wish to know about prakrti [nature],
purusa [the enjoyer], and the field and the knower of the field, and of
knowledge and the object of knowledge.



The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: This body, 0 son of Kunti, is called
the field, and one who knows this body is called the knower of the field.

PURPORT

Arjuna was inquisitive about prakrti (nature), purusa (the enjoyer), ksetra
(the field), ksetTa-jﬁa (its knower), and knowledge and the object of
knowledge. When he inquired about all these, Krsna said that this body is
called the field and that one who knows this body is called the knower of the
field. This body is the field of activity for the conditioned soul. The
conditioned soul is entrapped in material existence, and he attempts to lord it
over material nature. And so, according to his capacity to dominate material
nature, he gets a field of activity. That field of activity is the body. And what is
the body? The body is made of senses. The conditioned soul wants to enjoy
sense gratification, and, according to his capacity to enjoy sense gratification,
he is offered a body, or field of activity. Therefore the body is called ksetm, or
the field of activity for the conditioned soul. Now, the person, who should not
identify himself with the body, is called ksetTa-jﬁa, the knower of the field. It is
not very difficult to understand the difference between the field and its
knower, the body and the knower of the body. Any person can consider that
from childhood to old age he undergoes so many changes of body and yet is
still one person, remaining. Thus there is a difference between the knower of
the field of activities and the actual field of activities. A living conditioned
soul can thus understand that he is different from the body. It is described in
the beginning—dehino ’smin—that the living entity is within the body and
that the body is changing from childhood to boyhood and from boyhood to
youth and from youth to old age, and the person who owns the body knows
that the body is changing. The owner is distinctly ksetTa-jﬁa. Sometimes we
think, “I am happy,” “I am a man,” “I am a woman,” “I am a dog,” “I am a cat.”
These are the bodily designations of the knower. But the knower is different
from the body. Although we may use many articles—our clothes, etc.—we
know that we are different from the things used. Similarly, we also understand
by a little contemplation that we are different from the body. I or you or



anyone else who owns the body is called ksetTa-jﬁa, the knower of the field of
activities, and the body is called ksetm, the field of activities itself.

In the first siX chapters of Bhagavad-gitc‘t the knower of the body (the living
entity) and the position by which he can understand the Supreme Lord are
described. In the middle siX chapters of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the relationship between the individual soul and
the Supersoul in regard to devotional serVice are described. The superior
position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the subordinate position
of the individual soul are definitely defined in these chapters. The living
entities are subordinate under all circumstances, but in their forgetfulness they
are suffering. When enlightened by pious activities, they approach the
Supreme Lord in different capacities—as the distressed, those in want of
money, the inquisitive, and those in search of knowledge. That is also
described. Now, starting with the Thirteenth Chapter, how the living entity
comes into contact with material nature and how he is delivered by the
Supreme Lord through the different methods of fruitive activities, cultivation
of knowledge, and the discharge of devotional serVice are explained. Although
the living entity is completely different from the material body, he somehow
becomes related. This also is explained.

TEXT 3

éaﬁatﬁnfﬁrﬁraﬁéﬁqml
ﬁaéaﬁaﬁﬁﬁrﬁnémuau

ksetra-jﬁam cc‘tpi mam viddhi
sarva—ksetresu bhc‘trata

ksetra—ksetrajﬁayor jﬁc‘mam

yat taj jﬁc‘mam matam mama

SYNONYMS

ksetra-jﬁam—the knower of the field; ca—also; api—certainly; mc‘tm—Me;



Uiddhi—know; sarva—all; ksetresu—in bodily fields; bhc‘trata—O son of
Bharata; ksetTa—the field of activities (the body); ksetTa—jﬁayOh—and the
knower of the field; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge of; yat—that which; tat—that;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; matam—opinion; mama—My.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all
bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is called knowledge. That is
My opinion.

PURPORT

While discussing the subject of the body and the knower of the body, the
soul and the Supersoul, we shall find three different topics of study: the Lord,
the living entity, and matter. In every field of activities, in every body, there
are two souls: the individual soul and the Supersoul. Because the Supersoul is
the plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, Krsna
says, “I am also the knower, but I am not the individual knower of the body. I
am the superknower. I am present in every body as the Paramatma, or
Supersoul.”

One who studies the subject matter of the field of activity and the knower
of the field very minutely, in terms of this Bhagavad-gitc‘t, can attain to
knowledge.

The Lord says, “I am the knower of the field of activities in every individual
body.” The individual may be the knower of his own body, but he is not in
knowledge of other bodies. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is
present as the Supersoul in all bodies, knows everything about all bodies. He
knows all the different bodies of all the various species of life. A citizen may
know everything about his patch of land, but the king knows not only his
palace but all the properties possessed by the individual citizens. Similarly, one
may be the proprietor of the body individually, but the Supreme Lord is the
proprietor of all bodies. The king is the original proprietor of the kingdom, and
the citizen is the secondary proprietor. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the



supreme proprietor of all bodies.

The body consists of the senses. The Supreme Lord is Hrsikes’a, Which
means “the controller of the senses.” He is the original controller of the senses,
just as the king is the original controller of all the activities of the state; the
citizens are secondary controllers. The Lord says, “I am also the knower.” This
means that He is the superknower; the individual soul knows only his
particular body. In the Vedic literature, it is stated as follows:

ksetrc‘mi hi s’arirc‘mi
bijam cc‘tpi s’ubhc‘ts’ubhe

tc‘mi vetti sa yoga‘ttmc‘t
tatah ksetra—jﬁa ucyate

This body is called the ksetm, and within it dwells the owner of the body
and the Supreme Lord, who knows both the body and the owner of the body.
Therefore He is called the knower of all fields. The distinction between the
field of activities, the knower of activities, and the supreme knower of
activities is described as follows. Perfect knowledge of the constitution of the
body, the constitution of the individual soul, and the constitution of the
Supersoul is known in terms of Vedic literature as jﬁc‘ma. That is the opinion of
Krsna. To understand both the soul and the Supersoul as one yet distinct is
knowledge. One who does not understand the field of activity and the knower
of activity is not in perfect knowledge. One has to understand the position of
prakrti (nature), purusa (the enjoyer of nature) and is’vara (the knower who
dominates or controls nature and the individual soul). One should not confuse
the three in their different capacities. One should not confuse the painter, the
painting and the easel. This material world, which is the field of activities, is
nature, and the enjoyer of nature is the living entity, and above them both is
the supreme controller, the Personality of Godhead. It is stated in the Vedic
language (in the §Vetés’vatara Upam'saa 1.12), bhoktc‘t bhogyam preritc‘tram ca
matvc‘t/ sarvam proktam tri vidham—brahmam etat. There are three Brahman
conceptions: prakrti is Brahman as the field of activities, and the jiva
(individual soul) is also Brahman and is trying to control material nature, and
the controller of both of them is also Brahman, but He is the factual controller.



In this chapter it will also be explained that out of the two knowers, one is
fallible and the other is infallible. One is superior and the other is subordinate.
One who understands the two knowers of the field to be one and the same
contradicts the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who states here very clearly,
“I am also the knower of the field of activity.” One who misunderstands a rope
to be a serpent is not in knowledge. There are different kinds of bodies, and
there are different owners of the bodies. Because each individual soul has his
individual capacity for lording it over material nature, there are different
bodies. But the Supreme also is present in them as the controller. The word ca
is significant, for it indicates the total number of bodies. That is the opinion of
Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana. Krsna is the Supersoul present in each and every
body apart from the individual soul. And Krsna explicitly says here that the
Supersoul is the controller of both the field of activities and the finite enjoyer.

TEXT 4

Wwwmﬁmaﬁl
Haﬁwamﬁﬁmueu

tat ksetram yac ca yt‘tdrk ca
yad-vikc‘tri yatas’ ca yat
sa ca yo yat—prabhdvas’ ca
tat samasena me s’mu

SYNONYMS

tat—that; ksetram—field of activities; yat—what; ca—also; yt‘tdrk—as it is;
ca—also; yat—having what; vikc‘tri—changes; yatah—from which; ca—also;
yat—what; sah—he; ca—also; yah—who; yat—having what;
prabhc‘wah—inﬂuence; ca—also; tat—that; samdsena—in summary; me—from
Me; s’mu—understand.

TRANSLATION



Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how it is
constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, who that knower of
the field of activities is, and what his influences are.

PURPORT

The Lord is describing the field of activities and the knower of the field of
activities in their constitutional positions. One has to know how this body is
constituted, the materials of which this body is made, under whose control this
body is working, how the changes are taking place, wherefrom the changes are
coming, what the causes are, what the reasons are, what the ultimate goal of
the individual soul is, and what the actual form of the individual soul is. One
should also know the distinction between the individual living soul and the
Supersoul, their different influences, their potentials, etc. One just has to
understand this Bhagavad-gitc‘t directly from the description given by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and all this will be clarified. But one should
be careful not to consider the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every body
to be one with the individual soul, the jiva. This is something like equating the
potent and the impotent.

TEXT 5

ﬁﬁég‘qtvﬁeiaﬁﬁrﬁ‘rﬁﬁzgwl
mﬁﬁamﬁ‘rﬁfaﬁzuau

rsibhir bahudhc‘t gitam
chandobhir vividhaih prthak
brahma—sﬁtra—padais’ caiva

hetumadbhir vinis’citaih

SYNONYMS

Tsibhih—by the wise sages; bahudhc‘t—in many ways; gitam—described;



chandobhih—by Vedic hymns; vividhaih—various; prthak—variously;
brahma—sﬁtra—of the Vedanta; padaih—by the aphorisms; ca—also;
eva—certainly; hetu—madbhih—with cause and effect; vinis’citaih—certain.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of activities is
described by various sages in various Vedic writings. It is especially presented in
Vedanta-sﬁtra with all reasoning as to cause and effect.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the highest authority in
explaining this knowledge. Still, as a matter of course, learned scholars and
standard authorities always give evidence from previous authorities. Krsna is
explaining this most controversial point regarding the duality and nonduality
of the soul and the Supersoul by referring to a scripture, the Vedanta, which is
accepted as authority. First He says, “This is according to different sages.” As
far as the sages are concerned, besides Himself, Vyasadeva (the author of the
Vedc‘mta—sﬁtra) is a great sage, and in the Vedc‘mta-sﬁtra duality is perfectly
explained. And Vyasadeva’s father, Paras’ara, is also a great sage, and he writes
in his books of religiosity, aham tvam ca tathc‘mye. .. “we—you, I and the various
other living entities—are all transcendental, although in material bodies. Now
we are fallen into the ways of the three modes of material nature according to
our different karma. As such, some are on higher levels, and some are in the
lower nature. The higher and lower natures exist due to ignorance and are
being manifested in an infinite number of living entities. But the Supersoul,
which is infallible, is uncontaminated by the three qualities of nature and is
transcendental.” Similarly, in the original Vedas, a distinction between the
soul, the Supersoul and the body is made, especially in the Katha Upcmisad.
There are many great sages who have explained this, and Paras’ara is
considered principal among them.

The word Chandobhih refers to the various Vedic literatures. The Taittiﬁya
Upcmisad, for example, which is a branch of the Yajm Veda, describes nature,



the living entity and the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

As stated before, ksetm is the field of activities, and there are two kinds of
ksetTa-jﬁa: the individual living entity and the supreme living entity. As stated
in the T aittﬁ‘iya Upam'saa (2.9), brahma puccham pratisthc‘t. There is a
manifestation of the Supreme Lord’s energy known as anna-maya, dependence
upon food for existence. This is a materialistic realization of the Supreme.
Then, in prc‘ma-maya, after realizing the Supreme Absolute Truth in food, one
can realize the Absolute Truth in the living symptoms or life forms. In
jﬁc‘ma-maya, realization extends beyond the living symptoms to the point of
thinking, feeling and willing. Then there is Brahman realization, called
Uijﬁc'ma-maya, in which the living entity’s mind and life symptoms are
distinguished from the living entity himself. The next and supreme stage is
c'mcmda-maya, realization of the all-blissful nature. Thus there are five stages of
Brahman realization, which are called brahma puccham. Out of these, the first
three—cmna—maya, prc‘ma—maya and jﬁc‘ma—maya—involve the fields of
activities of the living entities. Transcendental to all these fields of activities is
the Supreme Lord, who is called c‘manda-maya. The Vedc‘mta-sﬁtra also
describes the Supreme by saying, c'mcmda-mayo ’bhyc'tsc'tt: the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is by nature full of joy. To enjoy His transcendental
bliss, He expands into Uijﬁc‘ma—maya, prc‘ma-maya, jﬁc‘ma—maya and anna—maya.
In the field of activities the living entity is considered to be the enjoyer, and
different from him is the c'mcmda-maya. That means that if the living entity
decides to enjoy in dovetailing himself with the c'manda-maya, then he
becomes perfect. This is the real picture of the Supreme Lord as the supreme
knower of the field, the living entity as the subordinate knower, and the
nature of the field of activities. One has to search for this truth in the
Vedc‘mta—sﬁtra, or Brahma-sﬁtra.

It is mentioned here that the codes of the Bmhma-sﬁtm are very nicely
arranged according to cause and effect. Some of the sﬁtms, or aphorisms, are
113 Viyad asTuteb (2.3.2), 115nm? shttelz (2.3.18), and parét tu tac-cllrutell
(2.3.40). The first aphorism indicates the field of activities, the second
indicates the living entity, and the third indicates the Supreme Lord, the
summum bonum among all the manifestations of various entities.



TEXTS 6—7

WWHI
WWEWW9 IIsII

maﬁaﬁeamﬁaﬁwﬁr
WWW"

mahc‘t—bhﬁtc‘my ahahkc‘tro
buddhir avyaktam eva ca
indriyc‘mi das’aikam ca
paﬁca cendriya—gocarc‘th
icchd dvesah sukham duhkham
sahghc‘ttas’ cetcmc‘t dhrtih
etat ksetram samasena
sa-vikc‘tram udc‘thrtam

SYNONYMS

mahc‘I—bhﬁtc‘mi—the great elements; ahahkc‘trah—false ego;
buddhih—intelligence; avyaktam—the unmanifested; eva—certainly; ca—also;
indriyc‘mi—the senses; das’a-ekam—eleven; ca—also; paﬁca—five; ca—also;
indriya—go—carc‘th—the objects of the senses; icchc‘I—desire; dvesah—hatred;
sukham—happiness; duhkham—distress; sahghc‘ttah—the aggregate;
cetcmc‘I—living symptoms; dhrtih—conviction; etat—all this; ksetram—the
field of activities; samdsena—in summary; sa—Uikc‘tram—with interactions;
udc‘thrtam—exemplified.

TRANSLATION

The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the ten
senses and the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred, happiness, distress,
the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions—all these are considered, in



summary, to be the field of activities and its interactions.

PURPORT

From all the authoritative statements of the great sages, the Vedic hymns
and the aphorisms of the Vedc'mta-sﬁtm, the components of this world can be
understood as follows. First there are earth, water, fire, air and ether. These are
the five great elements (mahc‘t-bhﬁta). Then there are false ego, intelligence
and the unmanifested stage of the three modes of nature. Then there are five
senses for acquiring knowledge: the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin. Then
five working senses: voice, legs, hands, anus and genitals. Then, above the
senses, there is the mind, which is within and which can be called the sense
within. Therefore, including the mind, there are eleven senses altogether.
Then there are the five objects of the senses: smell, taste, form, touch and
sound. Now the aggregate of these twenty-four elements is called the field of
activity. If one makes an analytical study of these twenty-four subjects, then he
can very well understand the field of activity. Then there are desire, hatred,
happiness and distress, which are interactions, representations of the five great
elements in the gross body. The living symptoms, represented by consciousness
and conviction, are the manifestation of the subtle body—mind, ego and
intelligence. These subtle elements are included within the field of activities.

The five great elements are a gross representation of the false ego, which in
turn represents the primal stage of false ego technically called the materialistic
conception, or tc'tmasa-buddhi, intelligence in ignorance. This, further,
represents the unmanifested stage of the three modes of material nature. The
unmanifested modes of material nature are called pradhc‘ma.

One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along with
their interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. In Bhagavad-gitc‘t,
a summary only is given.

The body is the representation of all these factors, and there are changes of
the body, which are siX in number: the body is born, it grows, it stays, it
produces by-products, then it begins to decay, and at the last stage it vanishes.
Therefore the field is a nonpermanent material thing. However, the ksetTa-jﬁa,



the knower of the field, its proprietor, is different.

TEXTS 8—12

mm WWI
WWI? 91W WWW II ‘2? ||

(8)
amc‘mitvam adambhitvam
ahimsc‘t ksc‘mtir c‘trjavam
c‘tcc‘tryopc‘tsanam s’aucam
sthairyam c‘ttma—vinigrahah

(9)
indriyc‘trthesu vairc‘tgyam
anahahkc‘tra eva ca
janma—mrtyu—jarc‘t-vyc‘tdhi-
duhkha—dosc‘mudars’anam

(10)
asaktir anabhisvahgah
putra-dt‘tra-grhddisu
nityam ca sama—cittatvam
istc‘mistopapattisu



(11)
mayi cc‘manya—yogena
bhaktir avyabhicc‘trini
vivikta—des’a—sevitvam
aratir jcma—samsadi

(12)
adhyc‘ttma-jﬁc‘ma—nityatvam
tattva—jﬁc‘mc‘trtha—dars’anam

etaj jﬁc‘mam iti proktam
ajﬁc‘mam yad ato ’nyathc‘t

SYNONYMS

amc‘mitvam—humility; adambhitvam—pridelessness; ahimsc‘I—nonviolence;
ksc‘mtih—tolerance; c‘trjavam—simplicity; c‘tcc‘trya—upc‘tsanam—approaching a
bona fide spiritual master; s’aucam—cleanliness; sthairyam—steadfastness;
c‘ttma—vinigrahah—self-control; indriya—arthesu—in the matter of the senses;
vairc‘tgyam—renunciation; anahahkc‘trah—being without false egoism;
eva—certainly; ca—also; janma—of birth; mrtyu—death; jarc‘t—old age;
vyc‘tdhi—and disease; duhkha—of the distress; dosa—the fault;
anudars’anam—observing; asaktih—being without attachment;
anabhisvahgah—being without association; putra—for son; dc‘tra—wife;
grha—c‘tdisu—home, etc.; nityam—constant; ca—also;
sama—cittatvam—equilibrium; ista—the desirable; anista—and undesirable;
upapattisu—having obtained; mayi—unto Me; ca—also; ananya-yogena—by
unalloyed devotional service; bhaktih—devotion; avyabhicc‘trini—without any
break; vivikta—to solitary; des’a—places; sevitvam—aspiring; aratih—being
without attachment; jana-samsadi—to people in general;
adhyc'ttma—pertaining to the self; jﬁc‘ma—in knowledge;
nityatvam—constancy; tattUa—jﬁc‘ma—of knowledge of the truth; artha—for
the object; dars’anam—philosophy; etat—all this; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
iti—thus; proktam—declared; ajﬁc‘mam—ignorance; yat—that which;
atah—from this; anyathc‘I—other.



TRANSLATION

Humility; pridelessness; nonviolence; tolerance; simplicity; approaching a
bona fide spiritual master; cleanliness; steadiness; self-control; renunciation of
the objects of sense gratification; absence of false ego; the perception of the evil
of birth, death, old age and disease; detachment; freedom from entanglement
with children, wife, home and the rest; even-mindedness amid pleasant and
unpleasant events; constant and unalloyed devotion to Me; aspiring to live in a
solitary place; detachment from the general mass of people; accepting the
importance of self-realization; and philosophical search for the Absolute
Truth—all these I declare to be knowledge, and besides this whatever there
may be is ignorance.

PURPORT

This process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less intelligent
men as being the interaction of the field of activity. But actually this is the real
process of knowledge. If one accepts this process, then the possibility of
approaching the Absolute Truth exists. This is not the interaction of the
twenty-four elements, as described before. This is actually the means to get out
of the entanglement of those elements. The embodied soul is entrapped by the
body, which is a casing made of the twenty-four elements, and the process of
knowledge as described here is the means to get out of it. Of all the
descriptions of the process of knowledge, the most important point is described
in the first line of the eleventh verse. Mayi cc‘mcmya—yogena bhaktir
avyabhicc‘trini: the process of knowledge terminates in unalloyed devotional
serVice to the Lord. 80 if one does not approach, or is not able to approach, the
transcendental serVice of the Lord, then the other nineteen items are of no
particular value. But if one takes to devotional serVice in full Krsna
consciousness, the other nineteen items automatically develop within him. As
stated in grimad-Blzégavatam (5.18.12), yasyc‘tsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiﬁccmc‘t
sarvair gunais tatra same‘tsate smith. All the good qualities of knowledge develop
in one who has attained the stage of devotional serVice. The principle of



accepting a spiritual master, as mentioned in the eighth verse, is essential.
Even for one who takes to devotional serVice, it is most important.
Transcendental life begins when one accepts a bona fide spiritual master. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, clearly states here that this
process of knowledge is the actual path. Anything speculated beyond this is
nonsense.

As for the knowledge outlined here, the items may be analyzed as follows.
Humility means that one should not be anxious to have the satisfaction of
being honored by others. The material conception of life makes us very eager
to receive honor from others, but from the point of View of a man in perfect
knowledge—who knows that he is not this body—anything, honor or
dishonor, pertaining to this body is useless. One should not be hankering after
this material deception. People are very anxious to be famous for their religion,
and consequently sometimes it is found that without understanding the
principles of religion one enters into some group which is not actually
following religious principles and then wants to advertise himself as a religious
mentor. As for actual advancement in spiritual science, one should have a test
to see how far he is progressing. He can judge by these items.

Nonviolence is generally taken to mean not killing or destroying the body,
but actually nonviolence means not to put others into distress. People in
general are trapped by ignorance in the material concept of life, and they
perpetually suffer material pains. So unless one elevates people to spiritual
knowledge, one is practicing Violence. One should try his best to distribute real
knowledge to the people, so that they may become enlightened and leave this
material entanglement. That is nonviolence.

Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult and dishonor
from others. If one is engaged in the advancement of spiritual knowledge,
there will be so many insults and much dishonor from others. This is expected
because material nature is so constituted. Even a boy like Prahlada, who, only
five years old, was engaged in the cultivation of spiritual knowledge, was
endangered when his father became antagonistic to his devotion. The father
tried to kill him in so many ways, but Prahlada tolerated him. So there may be
many impediments to making advancement in spiritual knowledge, but we



should be tolerant and continue our progress with determination.

Simplicity means that without diplomacy one should be so straightforward
that he can disclose the real truth even to an enemy. As for acceptance of the
spiritual master, that is essential, because without the instruction of a bona
fide spiritual master one cannot progress in the spiritual science. One should
approach the spiritual master with all humility and offer him all services so
that he will be pleased to bestow his blessings upon the disciple. Because a
bona fide spiritual master is a representative of Krsna, if he bestows any
blessings upon his disciple, that will make the disciple immediately advanced
without the disciple’s following the regulative principles. Or, the regulative
principles will be easier for one who has served the spiritual master without
reservation.

Cleanliness is essential for making advancement in spiritual life. There are
two kinds of cleanliness: external and internal. External cleanliness means
taking a bath, but for internal cleanliness one has to think of Krsna always and
chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This process cleans the accumulated dust of
past karma from the mind.

Steadiness means that one should be very determined to make progress in
spiritual life. Without such determination, one cannot make tangible progress.
And self-control means that one should not accept anything which is
detrimental to the path of spiritual progress. One should become accustomed
to this and reject anything which is against the path of spiritual progress. This
is real renunciation. The senses are so strong that they are always anxious to
have sense gratification. One should not cater to these demands, which are not
necessary. The senses should only be gratified to keep the body fit so that one
can discharge his duty in advancing in spiritual life. The most important and
uncontrollable sense is the tongue. If one can control the tongue, then there is
every possibility of controlling the other senses. The function of the tongue is
to taste and to Vibrate. Therefore, by systematic regulation, the tongue should
always be engaged in tasting the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna and
chanting Hare Krsna. As far as the eyes are concerned, they should not be
allowed to see anything but the beautiful form of Krsna. That will control the



eyes. Similarly, the ears should be engaged in hearing about Krsna and the
nose in smelling the ﬂowers offered to Krsna. This is the process of devotional
serVice, and it is understood here that Bhagavad-gitc‘t is simply expounding the
science of devotional serVice. Devotional serVice is the main and sole
objective. Unintelligent commentators on the Bhagavad-gitc‘t try to divert the
mind of the reader to other subjects, but there is no other subject in
Bhagavad-gitc‘t than devotional service.

False ego means accepting this body as oneself. When one understands that
he is not his body and is spirit soul, he comes to his real ego. Ego is there. False
ego is condemned, but not real ego. In the Vedic literature (Brbad—érarzyaka
Upam'saa 1.4.10) it is said, aham brahmc‘tsmi: I am Brahman, I am spirit. This “I
am,” the sense of self, also exists in the liberated stage of self-realization. This
sense of “I am” is ego, but when the sense of “I am” is applied to this false body
it is false ego. When the sense of self is applied to reality, that is real ego.
There are some philosophers who say we should give up our ego, but we cannot
give up our ego, because ego means identity. We ought, of course, to give up
the false identification with the body.

One should try to understand the distress of accepting birth, death, old age
and disease. There are descriptions in various Vedic literatures of birth. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam the world of the unborn, the child’s stay in the womb of
the mother, its suffering, etc., are all very graphically described. It should be
thoroughly understood that birth is distressful. Because we forget how much
distress we have suffered within the womb of the mother, we do not make any
solution to the repetition of birth and death. Similarly at the time of death
there are all kinds of sufferings, and they are also mentioned in the
authoritative scriptures. These should be discussed. And as far as disease and
old age are concerned, everyone gets practical experience. No one wants to be
diseased, and no one wants to become old, but there is no avoiding these.
Unless we have a pessimistic View of this material life, considering the
distresses of birth, death, old age and disease, there is no impetus for our
making advancement in spiritual life.

As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant that one
should have no feeling for these. They are natural objects of affection. But



when they are not favorable to spiritual progress, then one should not be
attached to them. The best process for making the home pleasant is Krsna
consciousness. If one is in full Krsna consciousness, he can make his home very
happy, because this process of Krsna consciousness is very easy. One need only
chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to
Krsna, have some discussion on books like Bhagavad-gitc‘t and
Srimad-Bhagavatam, and engage oneself in Deity worship. These four things
will make one happy. One should train the members of his family in this way.
The family members can sit down morning and evening and chant together
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare. If one can mold his family life in this way to develop
Krsna consciousness, following these four principles, then there is no need to
change from family life to renounced life. But if it is not congenial, not
favorable for spiritual advancement, then family life should be abandoned.
One must sacrifice everything to realize or serve Krsna, just as Arjuna did.
Arjuna did not want to kill his family members, but when he understood that
these family members were impediments to his Krsna realization, he accepted
the instruction of Krsna and fought and killed them. In all cases, one should be
detached from the happiness and distress of family life, because in this world
one can never be fully happy or fully miserable.

Happiness and distress are concomitant factors of material life. One should
learn to tolerate, as advised in Bhagavad-gitc‘t. One can never restrict the
coming and going of happiness and distress, so one should be detached from
the materialistic way of life and be automatically equipoised in both cases.
Generally, when we get something desirable we are very happy, and when we
get something undesirable we are distressed. But if we are actually in the
spiritual position these things will not agitate us. To reach that stage, we have
to practice unbreakable devotional serVice. Devotional serVice to Krsna
without deviation means engaging oneself in the nine processes of devotional
serVice—chanting, hearing, worshiping, offering respect, etc.—as described in
the last verse of the Ninth Chapter. That process should be followed.

Naturally, when one is adapted to the spiritual way of life, he will not want



to miX with materialistic men. That would go against his grain. One may test
himself by seeing how far he is inclined to live in a solitary place, without
unwanted association. Naturally a devotee has no taste for unnecessary
sporting or cinema-going or enjoying some social function, because he
understands that these are simply a waste of time. There are many research
scholars and philosophers who study sex life or some other subject, but
according to Bhagavad-gitc‘t such research work and philosophical speculation
have no value. That is more or less nonsensical. According to Bhagavad-gitc‘t,
one should make research, by philosophical discretion, into the nature of the
soul. One should make research to understand the self. That is recommended
here.

As far as self-realization is concerned, it is clearly stated here that
bhakti-yoga is especially practical. As soon as there is a question of devotion,
one must consider the relationship between the Supersoul and the individual
soul. The individual soul and the Supersoul cannot be one, at least not in the
bhakti conception, the devotional conception of life. This serVice of the
individual soul to the Supreme Soul is eternal, nityam, as it is clearly stated. 80
bhakti, or devotional serVice, is eternal. One should be established in that
philosophical conviction.

In the grimad-Blzégavatam (1.2.11) this is explained. Vadanti tat tattUa—vidas
tattvam yaj jﬁc‘mam advayam. “Those who are actually knowers of the Absolute
Truth know that the Self is realized in three different phases, as Brahman,
Paramatma and Bhagavan.” Bhagavan is the last word in the realization of the
Absolute Truth; therefore one should reach up to that platform of
understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus engage in the
devotional serVice of the Lord. That is the perfection of knowledge.

Beginning from practicing humility up to the point of realization of the
Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, this process is just like a
staircase beginning from the ground ﬂoor and going up to the top ﬂoor. Now
on this staircase there are so many people who have reached the first ﬂoor, the
second or the third ﬂoor, etc., but unless one reaches the top ﬂoor, which is
the understanding of Krsna, he is at a lower stage of knowledge. If anyone
wants to compete with God and at the same time make advancement in



spiritual knowledge, he will be frustrated. It is clearly stated that without
humility, understanding is not truly possible. To think oneself God is most
puffed up. Although the living entity is always being kicked by the stringent
laws of material nature, he still thinks, “I am God” because of ignorance. The
beginning of knowledge, therefore, is amc'mitva, humility. One should be
humble and know that he is subordinate to the Supreme Lord. Due to rebellion
against the Supreme Lord, one becomes subordinate to material nature. One
must know and be convinced of this truth.

TEXT 13

mmmmmﬁﬁl
Wwﬁaﬁmﬁﬁunu

jﬁeyam yat tat pravaksyc‘tmi
yaj jﬁc‘ttvc‘tmrtam as’nute
anc‘tdi mat—param brahma
ha sat tcm nc‘tsad ucyate

SYNONYMS

jﬁeyam—the knowable; yat—which; tat—that; pravaksyc‘tmi—I shall now
explain; yat—which; jﬁc‘ttvc‘I—knowing; amrtam—nectar; as’nute—one tastes;
anc‘tdi—beginningless; mat—param—subordinate to Me; brahma—spirit;
na—neither; sat—cause; tat—that; na—nor; asat—effect; ucyate—is said to

be.

TRANSLATION

I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the eternal.
Brahman, the spirit, beginningless and subordinate to Me, lies beyond the cause
and effect of this material world.

PURPORT



The Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the field.
He has also explained the process of knowing the knower of the field of
activities. Now He begins to explain the knowable, first the soul and then the
Supersoul. By knowledge of the knower, both the soul and the Supersoul, one
can relish the nectar of life. As explained in the Second Chapter, the living
entity is eternal. This is also confirmed here. There is no specific date at which
the jiva was born. Nor can anyone trace out the history of the jivc'ttmc't’s
manifestation from the Supreme Lord. Therefore it is beginningless. The
Vedic literature confirms this: ha jc‘tyate mriyate U67 vipas’cit (Katha Upam'sad
1.2.18). The knower of the body is never born and never dies, and he is full of
knowledge.

The Supreme Lord as the Supersoul is also stated in the Vedic literature
(§Vetés’vatara Upam'saa 6.16) to be pradhc‘ma—ksetrajﬁa—patir gunes’ah, the chief
knower of the body and the master of the three modes of material nature. In
the smrti it is said, dc‘tsa—thZto hater eva nc‘myasvaiva kadc‘tcana. The living
entities are eternally in the serVice of the Supreme Lord. This is also
confirmed by Lord Caitanya in His teachings. Therefore the description of
Brahman mentioned in this verse is in relation to the individual soul, and
when the word Brahman is applied to the living entity, it is to be understood
that he is vijﬁc‘ma—brahma as opposed to c‘manda—brahma. Ananda—brahma is the
Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 14

aﬁmmﬁmﬁaaqﬁa‘rsfﬁﬁlﬁﬁam
mzmmﬁsﬁrmeu

sarvatah pc‘mi-pc‘tdam tat

sarvato ’ksi-s’iro—mukham
sarvatah s’rutimal loke
sarvam c‘wrtya tisthati



SYNONYMS

sarvatah—everywhere; pc‘mi—hands; padam—legs; tat—that;
sarvatah—everywhere; aksi—eyes; s’irah—heads; mukham—faces;
sarvatah—everywhere; s’ruti—mat—having ears; loke—in the world;
sarvam—everything; c‘wrtya—covering; tisthati—exists.

TRANSLATION

Everywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes, heads and faces, and He has
ears everywhere. In this way the Supersoul exists, pervading everything.

PURPORT

As the sun exists diffusing its unlimited rays, so does the Supersoul, or
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He exists in His all-pervading form, and in
Him exist all the individual living entities, beginning from the first great
teacher, Brahma, down to the small ants. There are unlimited heads, legs,
hands and eyes, and unlimited living entities. All are existing in and on the
Supersoul. Therefore the Supersoul is all-pervading. The individual soul,
however, cannot say that he has his hands, legs and eyes everywhere. That is
not possible. If he thinks that under ignorance he is not conscious that his
hands and legs are diffused all over but when he attains to proper knowledge
he will come to that stage, his thinking is contradictory. This means that the
individual soul, having become conditioned by material nature, is not supreme.
The Supreme is different from the individual soul. The Supreme Lord can
extend His hand without limit; the individual soul cannot. In Bhagavad-gitc‘t
the Lord says that if anyone offers Him a ﬂower, or a fruit, or a little water, He
accepts it. If the Lord is a far distance away, how can He accept things? This is
the omnipotence of the Lord: even though He is situated in His own abode,
far, far away from earth, He can extend His hand to accept what anyone
offers. That is His potency. In the Brabma-san'ilu'té (5.37) it is stated, goloka eva
nivasaty akhilc‘ttma-bhﬁtah: although He is always engaged in pastimes in His



transcendental planet, He is all-pervading. The individual soul cannot claim
that he is all-pervading. Therefore this verse describes the Supreme Soul, the
Personality of Godhead, not the individual soul.

TEXT 15

WWI
maﬁﬁaﬁﬁwmauwu

sarvendriya—gundbhc‘tsam
sarvendriya-vivarjitam

asaktam sarva-bhrc caiva

nirgunam guna—bhoktr ca

SYNONYMS

sarva—of all; indriya—senses; guna—of the qualities; c‘tbhc‘tsam—the original
source; sarva—all; indriya—senses; vivarjitam—being without;
asaktam—without attachment; sarva—tht—the maintainer of everyone;
ca—also; eva—certainly; nirgunam—without material qualities;
guna—bhoktT—master of the gunas; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without senses.
He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living beings. He
transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is the master of all the
modes of material nature.

PURPORT

The Supreme Lord, although the source of all the senses of the living
entities, doesn’t have material senses like they have. Actually, the individual
souls have spiritual senses, but in conditioned life they are covered with the



material elements, and therefore the sense activities are exhibited through
matter. The Supreme Lord’s senses are not so covered. His senses are
transcendental and are therefore called m'rguna. Guna means the material
modes, but His senses are without material covering. It should be understood
that His senses are not exactly like ours. Although He is the source of all our
sensory activities, He has His transcendental senses, which are
uncontaminated. This is very nicely explained in the §V€t§§V3tara Upan11sad
(3.19) in the verse apc‘mi—pc‘tdo javcmo grahitc‘t. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead has no hands which are materially contaminated, but He has His
hands and accepts whatever sacrifice is offered to Him. That is the distinction
between the conditioned soul and the Supersoul. He has no material eyes, but
He has eyes—otherwise how could He see? He sees everything—past, present
and future. He lives within the heart of the living being, and He knows what
we have done in the past, what we are doing now, and what is awaiting us in
the future. This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gitc‘t: He knows everything, but
no one knows Him. It is said that the Supreme Lord has no legs like us, but He
can travel throughout space because He has spiritual legs. In other words, the
Lord is not impersonal; He has His eyes, legs, hands and everything else, and
because we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord we also have these things.
But His hands, legs, eyes and senses are not contaminated by material nature.
Bhagavad-gitc‘t also confirms that when the Lord appears He appears as He is
by His internal potency. He is not contaminated by the material energy,
because He is the Lord of material energy. In the Vedic literature we find that
His whole embodiment is spiritual. He has His eternal form, called
sac—cid—c‘manda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1]. He is full of all opulence. He is the proprietor
of all wealth and the owner of all energy. He is the most intelligent and is full
of knowledge. These are some of the symptoms of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is the maintainer of all living entities and the witness of all
activity. As far as we can understand from Vedic literature, the Supreme Lord
is always transcendental. Although we do not see His head, face, hands or legs,
He has them, and when we are elevated to the transcendental situation we can
see the Lord’s form. Due to materially contaminated senses, we cannot see His
form. Therefore the impersonalists, who are still materially affected, cannot



understand the Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 16

Mammal
QWWWHHELMSII

bahir antas’ ca thZtc‘mc‘Im
acaram caram eva ca

sﬁksmawc‘tt tad avijﬁeyam

dma—stham cc‘mtike ca tat

SYNONYMS

bahih—outside; antah—inside; ca—also; bhﬁtanc‘tm—of all living entities;
acaram—not moving; caram—moving; eva—also; ca—and; sﬁksmawc‘tt—on
account of being subtle; tat—that; avijﬁeyam—unknowable; dma-stham—far
away; ca—also; antike—near; ca—and; tat—that.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Truth exists outside and inside of all living beings, the moving
and the nonmoving. Because He is subtle, He is beyond the power of the
material senses to see or to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all.

PURPORT

In Vedic literature we understand that Narayana, the Supreme Person, is
residing both outside and inside of every living entity. He is present in both
the spiritual and material worlds. Although He is far, far away, still He is near
to us. These are the statements of Vedic literature. Asino damm wajati s’ayc‘mo
yc'tti sarvatah (Katha Upam'saa 1.2.21). And because He is always engaged in
transcendental bliss, we cannot understand how He is enjoying His full
opulence. We cannot see or understand with these material senses. Therefore



in the Vedic language it is said that to understand Him our material mind and
senses cannot act. But one who has purified his mind and senses by practicing
Krsna consciousness in devotional serVice can see Him constantly. It is
confirmed in Brahma-samhitc't that the devotee who has developed love for the
Supreme God can see Him always, without cessation. And it is confirmed in
Bbagavad—gita (11.54) that He can be seen and understood only by devotional
service. Bhaktyc‘t tv cmanyayd s’akyah.

TEXT 17

Waaﬁgﬁﬁﬁaaml
WHWWWHIINII

avibhaktam ca bhﬁtesu
vibhaktam iva ca sthitam
thZta—bhartr ca taj jﬁeyam
grasisnu prabhavisnu ca

SYNONYMS

avibhaktam—without division; ca—also; thZtesu—in all living beings;
vibhaktam—divided; iva—as if; ca—also; sthitam—situated; thZta—bhartT—the
maintainer of all living entities; ca—also; tat—that; jﬁeyam—to be
understood; grasisnu—devouring; prabhavisnu—developing; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

Although the Supersoul appears to be divided among all beings, He is never
divided. He is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every living
entity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.

PURPORT

The Lord is situated in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. Does this mean



that He has become divided? No. Actually, He is one. The example is given of
the sun: The sun, at the meridian, is situated in its place. But if one goes for
five thousand miles in all directions and asks, “Where is the sun?” everyone
will say that it is shining on his head. In the Vedic literature this example is
given to show that although He is undivided, He is situated as if divided. Also
it is said in Vedic literature that one Visnu is present everywhere by His
omnipotence, just as the sun appears in many places to many persons. And the
Supreme Lord, although the maintainer of every living entity, devours
everything at the time of annihilation. This was confirmed in the Eleventh
Chapter when the Lord said that He had come to devour all the warriors
assembled at Kuruksetra. He also mentioned that in the form of time He
devours also. He is the annihilator, the killer of all. When there is creation, He
develops all from their original state, and at the time of annihilation He
devours them. The Vedic hymns confirm the fact that He is the origin of all
living entities and the rest of all. After creation, everything rests in His
omnipotence, and after annihilation everything again returns to rest in Him.
These are the confirmations of Vedic hymns. Yato U67 imc‘mi thZtc‘mi jc‘tycmte
yena jc‘ttc‘mi jivcmti yat praycmty abhisam-vis’anti tad brahma tad vijijﬁc‘tsasva
( T aittllri ya Upam'saa 3.1).

TEXT 18

WWW:W§I
aﬁﬁdamﬁeﬁaﬁaﬁrﬁﬁuwu

jyotisc‘tm api taj jyotis

tamasah param ucyate
jﬁc‘mam jﬁeyam jﬁc‘ma—gamyam

hrdi sarvasya visthitam

SYNONYMS

jyotisc‘tm—in all luminous objects; api—also; tat—that; jyotih—the source of



light; tamasah—the darkness; param—beyond; ucyate—is said;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; jﬁeyam—to be known; jﬁc‘ma—gamyam—to be approached
by knowledge; thi—in the heart; sarvasya—of everyone; visthitam—situated.

TRANSLATION

He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the darkness
of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the object of knowledge,
and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in everyone’s heart.

PURPORT

The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the source of light
in all luminous objects like the sun, moon and stars. In the Vedic literature we
find that in the spiritual kingdom there is no need of sun or moon, because the
effulgence of the Supreme Lord is there. In the material world that
brahmajyoti, the Lord’s spiritual effulgence, is covered by the mahat-tattva, the
material elements; therefore in this material world we require the assistance of
sun, moon, electricity, etc., for light. But in the spiritual world there is no need
of such things. It is clearly stated in the Vedic literature that because of His
luminous effulgence, everything is illuminated. It is clear, therefore, that His
situation is not in the material world. He is situated in the spiritual world,
which is far, far away in the spiritual sky. That is also confirmed in the Vedic
literature. Aditya-vamam tamasah parastc‘tt (§Vetés’vatara Upam'saa 3.8). He is
just like the sun, eternally luminous, but He is far, far beyond the darkness of
this material world.

His knowledge is transcendental. The Vedic literature confirms that
Brahman is concentrated transcendental knowledge. To one who is anxious to
be transferred to that spiritual world, knowledge is given by the Supreme Lord,
who is situated in everyone’s heart. One Vedic mantra (Igvetéivatara Upan11sad
6.18) says, tam ha devam c‘ttma—buddhi-prakc‘ts’am mumuksm vai s’aranam aham
prapadye. One must surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he
at all wants liberation. As far as the goal of ultimate knowledge is concerned, it
is also confirmed in Vedic literature: tam eva Uiditvc‘tti mrtyum eti. “Only by



knowing Him can one surpass the boundary of birth and death.” (Igvetéivatara
Upam'saa 3.8)

He is situated in everyone’s heart as the supreme controller. The Supreme
has legs and hands distributed everywhere, and this cannot be said of the
individual soul. Therefore that there are two knowers of the field of
actiVity—the individual soul and the Supersoul—must be admitted. One’s
hands and legs are distributed locally, but Krsna’s hands and legs are
distributed everywhere. This is confirmed in the gvetésVatara Upam'saa (3.17):
sarvasya prabhum is’c‘mam sarvasya s’aranam brhat. That Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Supersoul, is the prabhu, or master, of all living entities; therefore
He is the ultimate shelter of all living entities. So there is no denying the fact
that the Supreme Supersoul and the individual soul are always different.

TEXT 19
31% 233i EMT EIFI 391' a‘FI'; W: I
ages W WW II 99 ||
iti ksetram tathd jﬁc‘mam
jﬁeyam coktam same‘tsatah

mad—bhakta etad vijﬁc‘tya
mad-bhc‘wc‘tyopapadyate

SYNONYMS

iti—thus; ksetram—the field of activities (the body); tathc't—also;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; jﬁeyam—the knowable; ca—also; uktam—described;
samasatah—in summary; mat—bhaktah—My devotee; etat—all this;
vijﬁc‘tya—after understanding; mat—bhc‘wc‘tya—to My nature;
upapadyate—attains.

TRANSLATION
Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable have



been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understand this
thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.

PURPORT

The Lord has described in summary the body, knowledge and the knowable.
This knowledge is of three things: the knower, the knowable and the process of
knowing. Combined, these are called Uijﬁc'ma, or the science of knowledge.
Perfect knowledge can be understood by the unalloyed devotees of the Lord
directly. Others are unable to understand. The monists say that at the ultimate
stage these three items become one, but the devotees do not accept this.
Knowledge and development of knowledge mean understanding oneself in
Krsna consciousness. We are being led by material consciousness, but as soon
as we transfer all consciousness to Krsna’s activities and realize that Krsna is
everything, then we attain real knowledge. In other words, knowledge is
nothing but the preliminary stage of understanding devotional serVice
perfectly. In the Fifteenth Chapter this will be very clearly explained.

Now, to summarize, one may understand that verses 6 and 7, beginning
from mahc‘t-bhﬁtc‘mi and continuing through cetcmc't dhrtih, analyze the material
elements and certain manifestations of the symptoms of life. These combine to
form the body, or the field of activities. And verses 8 through 12, from
amc‘mitvam through tattva—jﬁc‘mc‘trtha—dars’anam, describe the process of
knowledge for understanding both types of knower of the field of activities,
namely the soul and the Supersoul. Then verses 13 through 18, beginning from
anc‘tdi mat—param and continuing through hrdi sarvasya visthitam, describe the
soul and the Supreme Lord, or the Supersoul.

Thus three items have been described: the field of activity (the body), the
process of understanding, and both the soul and the Supersoul. It is especially
described here that only the unalloyed devotees of the Lord can understand
these three items clearly. So for these devotees Bhagavad-gitc‘t is fully useful; it
is they who can attain the supreme goal, the nature of the Supreme Lord,
Krsna. In other words, only devotees, and not others, can understand
Bhagavad-gitc‘t and derive the desired result.



TEXT 20
WWQHWWI
m9; Wé‘aﬁrﬁﬁﬁmnmu Q0 N

prakrtim purusam caiva

viddhy anc‘tdi ubhc‘w api
vikc‘trc‘tms’ ca gunc‘tms’ caiva
viddhi prakrti—sambhavc‘m

SYNONYMS

prakrtim—material nature; purusam—the living entities; ca—also;
eva—certainly; Uiddhi—you must know; cmc'tdi—without beginning;
ubhau—both; api—also; vikc‘trc‘m—transformations; ca—also; gunc‘m—the
three modes of nature; ca—also; eva—certainly; Uiddhi—know;
prakrti—material nature; sambhavc‘m—produced of.

TRANSLATION

Material nature and the living entities should be understood to be
beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter are products of
material nature.

PURPORT

By the knowledge given in this chapter, one can understand the body (the
field of activities) and the knowers of the body (both the individual soul and
the Supersoul). The body is the field of activity and is composed of material
nature. The individual soul that is embodied and enjoying the activities of the
body is the purusa, or the living entity. He is one knower, and the other is the
Supersoul. Of course, it is to be understood that both the Supersoul and the
individual entity are different manifestations of the Supreme Personality of



Godhead. The living entity is in the category of His energy, and the Supersoul
is in the category of His personal expansion.

Both material nature and the living entity are eternal. That is to say that
they existed before the creation. The material manifestation is from the energy
of the Supreme Lord, and so also are the living entities, but the living entities
are of the superior energy. Both the living entities and material nature existed
before this cosmos was manifested. Material nature was absorbed in the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Maha-Visnu, and when it was required, it
was manifested by the agency of mahat-tattva. Similarly, the living entities are
also in Him, and because they are conditioned, they are averse to serving the
Supreme Lord. Thus they are not allowed to enter into the spiritual sky. But
with the coming forth of material nature these living entities are again given a
chance to act in the material world and prepare themselves to enter into the
spiritual world. That is the mystery of this material creation. Actually the
living entity is originally the spiritual part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, but
due to his rebellious nature, he is conditioned within material nature. It really
does not matter how these living entities or superior entities of the Supreme
Lord have come in contact with material nature. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead knows, however, how and why this actually took place. In the
scriptures the Lord says that those attracted by this material nature are
undergoing a hard struggle for existence. But we should know it with certainty
from the descriptions of these few verses that all transformations and
inﬂuences of material nature by the three modes are also productions of
material nature. All transformations and variety in respect to living entities
are due to the body. As far as spirit is concerned, living entities are all the
same.

TEXT 21

WQWI
gzngagzmwﬁeﬁéqmﬁu Q? N

kc‘trya—kc‘trana—kartrtve



hetuh prakrtir ucyate
purusah sukha—duhkhc‘mc‘tm
bhoktrtve hetm ucyate

SYNONYMS

kc‘trya—of effect; kc‘trana—and cause; kartrtUe—in the matter of creation;
hetuh—the instrument; prakrtih—material nature; ucyate—is said to be;
purusah—the living entity; sukha—of happiness; duhkhc‘mc‘tm—and distress;
bhoktrtve—in enjoyment; hetuh—the instrument; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

Nature is said to be the cause of all material causes and effects, whereas the
living entity is the cause of the various sufferings and enjoyments in this world.

PURPORT

The different manifestations of body and senses among the living entities
are due to material nature. There are 8,400,000 different species of life, and
these varieties are creations of the material nature. They arise from the
different sensual pleasures of the living entity, who thus desires to live in this
body or that. When he is put into different bodies, he enjoys different kinds of
happiness and distress. His material happiness and distress are due to his body,
and not to himself as he is. In his original state there is no doubt of enjoyment;
therefore that is his real state. Because of the desire to lord it over material
nature, he is in the material world. In the spiritual world there is no such
thing. The spiritual world is pure, but in the material world everyone is
struggling hard to acquire different kinds of pleasures for the body. It might be
more clear to state that this body is the effect of the senses. The senses are
instruments for gratifying desire. Now, the sum total—body and instrument
senses—are offered by material nature, and as will be clear in the next verse,
the living entity is blessed or damned with circumstances according to his past
desire and activity. According to one’s desires and activities, material nature



places one in various residential quarters. The being himself is the cause of his
attaining such residential quarters and his attendant enjoyment or suffering.
Once placed in some particular kind of body, he comes under the control of
nature because the body, being matter, acts according to the laws of nature. At
that time, the living entity has no power to change that law. Suppose an entity
is put into the body of a dog. As soon as he is put into the body of a dog, he
must act like a dog. He cannot act otherwise. And if the living entity is put
into the body of a hog, then he is forced to eat stool and act like a hog.
Similarly, if the living entity is put into the body of a demigod, he must act
according to his body. This is the law of nature. But in all circumstances, the
Supersoul is with the individual soul. That is explained in the Vedas (Mandala!
Upam'saa 3.1.1) as follows: (1ch supamc‘t sayujc‘t sakhc‘tyah. The Supreme Lord is so
kind upon the living entity that He always accompanies the individual soul
and in all circumstances is present as the Supersoul, or Paramatma.

TEXT 22

Wmfﬁﬁml
wwwmﬁamumu

purusah prakrti—stho hi
bhm’tkte prakrti-jc‘m gunc‘m
kc‘tranam guna-sahgo ’sya

sad—asad—yoni-janmasu

SYNONYMS

purusah—the living entity; prakrti—sthah—being situated in the material
energy; hi—certainly; bhm’tkte—enjoys; pmkrti-jc‘m—produced by the material
nature; gunc‘m—the modes of nature; kc‘tranam—the cause; guna—sahgah—the
association with the modes of nature; asya—of the living entity; sat-asat—in
good and bad; yoni—species of life; jcmmasu—in births.



TRANSLATION

The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying
the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material
nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various species.

PURPORT

This verse is very important for an understanding of how the living entities
transmigrate from one body to another. It is explained in the Second Chapter
that the living entity is transmigrating from one body to another just as one
changes dress. This change of dress is due to his attachment to material
existence. As long as he is captivated by this false manifestation, he has to
continue transmigrating from one body to another. Due to his desire to lord it
over material nature, he is put into such undesirable circumstances. Under the
inﬂuence of material desire, the entity is born sometimes as a demigod,
sometimes as a man, sometimes as a beast, as a bird, as a worm, as an aquatic, as
a saintly man, as a bug. This is going on. And in all cases the living entity
thinks himself to be the master of his circumstances, yet he is under the
inﬂuence of material nature.

How he is put into such different bodies is explained here. It is due to
association with the different modes of nature. One has to rise, therefore,
above the three material modes and become situated in the transcendental
position. That is called Krsna consciousness. Unless one is situated in Krsna
consciousness, his material consciousness will oblige him to transfer from one
body to another because he has material desires since time immemorial. But he
has to change that conception. That change can be effected only by hearing
from authoritative sources. The best example is here: Arjuna is hearing the
science of God from Krsna. The living entity, if he submits to this hearing
process, will lose his long-cherished desire to dominate material nature, and
gradually and proportionately, as he reduces his long desire to dominate, he
comes to enjoy spiritual happiness. In a Vedic mantra it is said that as he
becomes learned in association with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he



proportionately relishes his eternal blissful life.

TEXT 23

Winﬁﬁmﬁmzl
WWﬁS :qizuqsu

upadrastc‘mumantd ca
bhartc‘t bhoktc‘t mahes’varah

parame‘ttmeti cc‘tpy ukto
dehe ’smin purusah parah

SYNONYMS

upadrastc‘t—overseer; anumantc‘t—permitter; ca—also; bhartc‘t—master;
bhoktc‘t—supreme enjoyer; mahc‘t-is’vamh—the Supreme Lord;
parama—c‘ttmd—the Supersoul; iti—also; ca—and; api—indeed; uktah—is said;
dehe—in the body; asmin—this; purusah—enjoyer; parah—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer, who is the Lord,
the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter, and who is
known as the Supersoul.

PURPORT

It is stated here that the Supersoul, who is always with the individual soul,
is the representation of the Supreme Lord. He is not an ordinary living entity.
Because the monist philosophers take the knower of the body to be one, they
think that there is no difference between the Supersoul and the individual
soul. To clarify this, the Lord says that He is represented as the Paramatma in
every body. He is different from the individual soul; He is para,
transcendental. The individual soul enjoys the activities of a particular field,



but the Supersoul is present not as finite enjoyer nor as one taking part in
bodily activities, but as the witness, overseer, permitter and supreme enjoyer.
His name is Paramatma, not c'ttmc't, and He is transcendental. It is distinctly
clear that the c'ttmc't and Paramatma are different. The Supersoul, the
Paramatma, has legs and hands everywhere, but the individual soul does not.
And because the Paramatma is the Supreme Lord, He is present within to
sanction the individual soul’s desiring material enjoyment. Without the
sanction of the Supreme Soul, the individual soul cannot do anything. The
individual is bhukta, or the sustained, and the Lord is bhoktc‘t, or the
maintainer. There are innumerable living entities, and He is staying in them
as a friend.

The fact is that every individual living entity is eternally part and parcel of
the Supreme Lord, and both of them are very intimately related as friends. But
the living entity has the tendency to reject the sanction of the Supreme Lord
and act independently in an attempt to dominate nature, and because he has
this tendency he is called the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord. The living
entity can be situated either in the material energy or in the spiritual energy.
As long as he is conditioned by the material energy, the Supreme Lord, as his
friend, the Supersoul, stays with him just to get him to return to the spiritual
energy. The Lord is always eager to take him back to the spiritual energy, but
due to his minute independence the individual entity is continually rejecting
the association of spiritual light. This misuse of independence is the cause of
his material strife in the conditioned nature. The Lord, therefore, is always
giving instruction from within and from without. From without He gives
instructions as stated in Bhagavad-gitc‘t, and from within He tries to convince
the living entity that his activities in the material field are not conducive to
real happiness. “Just give it up and turn your faith toward Me. Then you will be
happy,” He says. Thus the intelligent person who places his faith in the
Paramatma or the Supreme Personality of Godhead begins to advance toward
a blissful eternal life of knowledge.

TEXT 24



uﬁéﬁrwﬁwﬁfﬁqﬁzﬁl
851W asfqﬁISﬁﬁHIﬁ‘rSﬁSImﬁu Q8 ||

ya evam vetti purusam
prakrtim ca gunaih saha
sarvathc‘t vartamc‘mo ’pi
na sa bhﬁyo ’bhijc‘tyate

SYNONYMS

yah—anyone who; evam—thus; vetti—understands; purusam—the living
entity; prakrtim—material nature; ca—and; gunaih—the modes of material
nature; saha—with; sarvathc‘I—in all ways; vartamc‘mah—being situated;
api—in spite of; na—never; sah—he; bhﬁyah—again; abhijc‘tyate—takes his

birth.

TRANSLATION

One who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the living
entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure to attain liberation. He
will not take birth here again, regardless of his present position.

PURPORT

Clear understanding of material nature, the Supersoul, the individual soul
and their interrelation makes one eligible to become liberated and turn to the
spiritual atmosphere without being forced to return to this material nature.
This is the result of knowledge. The purpose of knowledge is to understand
distinctly that the living entity has by chance fallen into this material
existence. By his personal endeavor in association with authorities, saintly
persons and a spiritual master, he has to understand his position and then
revert to spiritual consciousness or Krsna consciousness by understanding
Bhagavad-gitc‘t as it is explained by the Personality of Godhead. Then it is
certain that he will never come again into this material existence; he will be



transferred into the spiritual world for a blissful eternal life of knowledge.

TEXT 25

WWWI
WWWWWIIQMI

dhyc‘menc‘ttmani pas’yanti

kecid c‘ttmc‘mam c‘ttmcmc‘t

anye sc‘mkhyena yogena
karma—yogena cc‘tpare

SYNONYMS

dhyc‘mena—by meditation; c‘ttmcmi—within the self; pas’yanti—see;
kecit—some; c‘ttmc‘mam—the Supersoul; c‘ttmanc‘I—by the mind; anye—others;
sc‘mkhyena—of philosophical discussion; yogena—by the yoga system;
karma—yogena—by activities without fruitive desire; ca—also; apare—others.

TRANSLATION

Some perceive the Supersoul within themselves through meditation, others
through the cultivation of knowledge, and still others through working without
fruitive desires.

PURPORT

The Lord informs Arjuna that the conditioned souls can be divided into
two classes as far as man’s search for self-realization is concerned. Those who
are atheists, agnostics and skeptics are beyond the sense of spiritual
understanding. But there are others, who are faithful in their understanding of
spiritual life, and they are called introspective devotees, philosophers, and
workers who have renounced fruitive results. Those who always try to establish
the doctrine of monism are also counted among the atheists and agnostics. In



other words, only the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are best
situated in spiritual understanding, because they understand that beyond this
material nature are the spiritual world and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is expanded as the Paramatma, the Supersoul in everyone, the
all-pervading Godhead. Of course there are those who try to understand the
Supreme Absolute Truth by cultivation of knowledge, and they can be
counted in the class of the faithful. The Sankhya philosophers analyze this
material world into twenty-four elements, and they place the individual soul as
the twenty-fifth item. When they are able to understand the nature of the
individual soul to be transcendental to the material elements, they are able to
understand also that above the individual soul there is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is the twenty-siXth element. Thus gradually they
also come to the standard of devotional serVice in Krsna consciousness. Those
who work without fruitive results are also perfect in their attitude. They are
given a chance to advance to the platform of devotional serVice in Krsna
consciousness. Here it is stated that there are some people who are pure in
consciousness and who try to find out the Supersoul by meditation, and when
they discover the Supersoul within themselves, they become transcendentally
situated. Similarly, there are others who also try to understand the Supreme
Soul by cultivation of knowledge, and there are others who cultivate the
hatha-yoga system and who try to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead
by childish activities.

TEXT 26

ﬁémazaaﬁmsqmﬁl
kﬁmﬁaﬁaﬁgﬁmmulqsu

anye tv evam ajc'mantah
s’rutvc‘myebhya upc‘tsate
te ’pi cdtitarcmty eva
mrtyum s’ruti—parc‘tyanc‘th



SYNONYMS

anye—others; tu—but; evam—thus; ajc‘mantah—without spiritual knowledge;
s’rutvc‘t—by hearing; anyebhyah—from others; upc‘tsate—begin to worship;
te—they; api—also; ca—and; atitaranti—transcend; eva—certainly;
mrtyum—the path of death; s’ruti—parc‘tyanc‘th—inclined to the process of
hearing.

TRANSLATION

Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual knowledge,
begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Him from others.
Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, they also transcend the path

of birth and death.

PURPORT

This verse is particularly applicable to modern society because in modern
society there is practically no education in spiritual matters. Some of the
people may appear to be atheistic or agnostic or philosophical, but actually
there is no knowledge of philosophy. As for the common man, if he is a good
soul, then there is a chance for advancement by hearing. This hearing process
is very important. Lord Caitanya, who preached Krsna consciousness in the
modern world, gave great stress to hearing because if the common man simply
hears from authoritative sources he can progress, especially, according to Lord
Caitanya, if he hears the transcendental Vibration Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. It
is stated, therefore, that all men should take advantage of hearing from
realized souls and gradually become able to understand everything. The
worship of the Supreme Lord will then undoubtedly take place. Lord Caitanya
has said that in this age no one needs to change his position, but one should
give up the endeavor to understand the Absolute Truth by speculative
reasoning. One should learn to become the servant of those who are in



knowledge of the Supreme Lord. If one is fortunate enough to take shelter of a
pure devotee, hear from him about self-realization and follow in his footsteps,
one will be gradually elevated to the position of a pure devotee. In this verse
particularly, the process of hearing is strongly recommended, and this is very
appropriate. Although the common man is often not as capable as so-called
philosophers, faithful hearing from an authoritative person will help one
transcend this material existence and go back to Godhead, back to home.

TEXT 27
W WEI WI
913W W H axe II

yc‘wat saﬁjc‘tyate kiﬁcit
sattvam sthc‘wara—jahgamam
ksetra—ksetrajﬁa—samyogc‘tt

tad viddhi bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

yt‘tvat—whatever; saﬁjc‘tyate—comes into being; kiﬁcit—anything;
sattvam—existence; sthc‘wara—not moving; jahgamam—moving; ksetra—of
the body; ksetra—jﬁa—and the knower of the body; samyogc‘tt—by the union
between; tat viddhi—you must know it; bharata-Tsabha—O chief of the
Bharatas.

TRANSLATION

O chief of the Bharatas, know that whatever you see in existence, both the
moving and the nonmoving, is only a combination of the field of activities and
the knower of the field.

PURPORT



Both material nature and the living entity, which were existing before the
creation of the cosmos, are explained in this verse. Whatever is created is but a
combination of the living entity and material nature. There are many
manifestations like trees, mountains and hills which are not moving, and there
are many existences which are moving, and all of them are but combinations
of material nature and the superior nature, the living entity. Without the
touch of the superior nature, the living entity, nothing can grow. The
relationship between matter and nature is eternally going on, and this
combination is effected by the Supreme Lord; therefore He is the controller of
both the superior and inferior natures. The material nature is created by Him,
and the superior nature is placed in this material nature, and thus all these
activities and manifestations take place.

TEXT 28

aﬁeﬁgﬁﬁrﬁmﬁaml
Wazmﬁamﬁruwu

samam sarvesu bhﬁtesu
tisthcmtam parames’varam
vinas’yatsv avinas’yantam
yah pas’yati sa pas’yati

SYNONYMS

samam—equally; sarvesu—in all; bhﬁtesu—living entities;
tisthan-tam—residing; parama—is’varam—the Supersoul; vinas’yatsu—in the
destructible; avinas’yantam—not destroyed; yah—anyone who; pas’yati—sees;
sah—he; pas’yati—actually sees.

TRANSLATION

One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all bodies,
and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul within the



destructible body is ever destroyed, actually sees.

PURPORT

Anyone who by good association can see three things combined
together—the body, the proprietor of the body, or individual soul, and the
friend of the individual soul—is actually in knowledge. Unless one has the
association of a real knower of spiritual subjects, one cannot see these three
things. Those who do not have such association are ignorant; they simply see
the body, and they think that when the body is destroyed everything is
finished. But actually it is not so. After the destruction of the body, both the
soul and the Supersoul exist, and they go on eternally in many various moving
and nonmoving forms. The Sanskrit word parames’vam is sometimes translated
as “the individual soul” because the soul is the master of the body and after the
destruction of the body he transfers to another form. In that way he is master.
But there are others who interpret this parames’vam to be the Supersoul. In
either case, both the Supersoul and the individual soul continue. They are not
destroyed. One who can see in this way can actually see what is happening.

TEXT 29

aﬁmﬁsaﬁaamﬁaaﬁamI
aﬁmﬁmﬁqﬁwﬁttuqsu

samam pas’ycm hi sarvatra
samavasthitam is’varam
ha hinasty c‘ttmam‘ttmc‘mam
tato yc‘tti parc‘tm gatim

SYNONYMS

samam—equally; pas’yan—seeing; hi—certainly; sarvatra—everywhere;
samavasthitam—equally situated; is’varam—the Supersoul; na—does not;
hinasti—degrade; c‘ttmcmc‘I—by the mind; c‘ttmc‘mam—the soul; tatah—then;



yc'tti—reaches; parc‘tm—the transcendental; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

One who sees the Supersoul equally present everywhere, in every living
being, does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the
transcendental destination.

PURPORT

The living entity, by accepting his material existence, has become situated
differently than in his spiritual existence. But if one understands that the
Supreme is situated in His Paramatma manifestation everywhere, that is, if one
can see the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every living
thing, he does not degrade himself by a destructive mentality, and he therefore
gradually advances to the spiritual world. The mind is generally addicted to
sense gratifying processes; but when the mind turns to the Supersoul, one
becomes advanced in spiritual understanding.

TEXT 30

WHWWWH
azmﬁraammmﬁamﬁruaou

prakrtyaiva ca karmc‘mi
kriyamc‘mc‘mi sarvas’ah

yah pas’yati tathc‘ttmc‘mam
akartc‘tram sa pas’yati

SYNONYMS

prakrtyc‘t—by material nature; eva—certainly; ca—also; karmani—activities;
kriyamc‘mc‘mi—being performed; sarvas’ah—in all respects; yah—anyone who;
pas’yati—sees; tathc‘t—also; c‘ttmc‘mam—himself; akartc‘tram—the nondoer;



sah—he; pas’yati—sees perfectly.

TRANSLATION

One who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is
created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing, actually sees.

PURPORT

This body is made by material nature under the direction of the Supersoul,
and whatever activities are going on in respect to one’s body are not his doing.
Whatever one is supposed to do, either for happiness or for distress, one is
forced to do because of the bodily constitution. The self, however, is outside all
these bodily activities. This body is given according to one’s past desires. To
fulfill desires, one is given the body, with which he acts accordingly.
Practically speaking, the body is a machine, designed by the Supreme Lord, to
fulfill desires. Because of desires, one is put into difficult circumstances to
suffer or to enjoy. This transcendental Vision of the living entity, when
developed, makes one separate from bodily activities. One who has such a
Vision is an actual seer.

TEXT 31

wmwmﬁwmﬁn

aaqaaﬁlﬁniaaamaﬁaaruaw

yadc‘t thZta—prthag—bhc‘wam
eka—stham anupas’yati
tata eva ca vistc‘tram
brahma sampadyate tadc‘t

SYNONYMS
yadc't—when; bhﬁta—of living entities; prthak-bhc‘wam—separated identities;



eka—stham—situated in one; anupas’yati—one tries to see through authority;
tatah eva—thereafter; ca—also; vistc‘tram—the expansion; brahma—the
Absolute; sampadyate—he attains; tada—at that time.

TRANSLATION

When a sensible man ceases to see different identities due to different
material bodies and he sees how beings are expanded everywhere, he attains to
the Brahman conception.

PURPORT

When one can see that the various bodies of living entities arise due to the
different desires of the individual soul and do not actually belong to the soul
itself, one actually sees. In the material conception of life, we find someone a
demigod, someone a human being, a dog, a cat, etc. This is material Vision, not
actual Vision. This material differentiation is due to a material conception of
life. After the destruction of the material body, the spirit soul is one. The spirit
soul, due to contact with material nature, gets different types of bodies. When
one can see this, he attains spiritual Vision; thus being freed from
differentiations like man, animal, big, low, etc., one becomes purified in his
consciousness and able to develop Krsna consciousness in his spiritual identity.
How he then sees things will be explained in the next verse.

TEXT 32

WWWWH
WSﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁﬁrﬁﬁmﬁuaqu

anc‘tditvc‘m nirgunatvc‘tt
paramatmc‘tyam avyayah
s’arira—stho ’pi kaunteya
ha karoti ha lipyate



SYNONYMS

anc‘tditvc‘tt—due to eternity; nirgunatvc‘tt—due to being transcendental;
parama—beyond material nature; c‘ttmc‘I—spirit; ayam—this;
avyayah—inexhaustible; s’arira—sthah—dwelling in the body; api—though;
kaunteya—O son of Kunti; ha karoti—never does anything; ha lipyate—nor is
he entangled.

TRANSLATION

Those with the Vision of eternity can see that the imperishable soul is
transcendental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despite contact with
the material body, 0 Arjuna, the soul neither does anything nor is entangled.

PURPORT

A living entity appears to be born because of the birth of the material body,
but actually the living entity is eternal; he is not born, and in spite of his being
situated in a material body, he is transcendental and eternal. Thus he cannot
be destroyed. By nature he is full of bliss. He does not engage himself in any
material activities; therefore the activities performed due to his contact with
material bodies do not entangle him.

TEXT 33

amaévﬁeﬁ‘WWI
Wﬁﬁamﬁqﬁmﬁuasu

yathc‘t sarva-gatam sauksmyc‘td
c‘tkc‘ts’am nopalipyate
sarvatrc‘wasthito dehe
tathc‘ttmc‘t nopalipyate



SYNONYMS

yathc‘I—as; sarva-gatam—all-pervading; sauksmyc‘tt—due to being subtle;
c‘tkc‘ts’am—the sky; na—never; upalipyate—mixes; sarvatra—everywhere;
avasthitah—situated; dehe—in the body; tathc‘t—so; dtmc‘I—the self; na—never;
upalipyate—mixes.

TRANSLATION

The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not miX with anything, although it is
all-pervading. Similarly, the soul situated in Brahman Vision does not miX with
the body, though situated in that body.

PURPORT

The air enters into water, mud, stool and whatever else is there; still it does
not miX with anything. Similarly, the living entity, even though situated in
varieties of bodies, is aloof from them due to his subtle nature. Therefore it is
impossible to see with the material eyes how the living entity is in contact with
this body and how he is out of it after the destruction of the body. No one in
science can ascertain this.

TEXT 34

ammzﬁmﬁﬁzﬁzl
ﬁﬁa‘lwﬁwﬁrmuseu

yathc‘t prakc‘ts’ayaty ekah
krtsnam lokam imam ravih
ksetram ksetri tathd krtsnam
prakc‘ts’ayati bhc‘trata

SYNONYMS



yathc‘I—as; prakc‘ts’ayati—illuminates; ekah—one; krtsnam—the whole;
lokam—universe; imam—this; ravih—sun; ksetram—this body; ksetri—the
soul; tathc‘I—similarly; krtsnam—all; prakc‘ts’ayati—illuminates; bhc‘trata—O son
of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so does the
living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire body by consciousness.

PURPORT

There are various theories regarding consciousness. Here in Bhagavad-gitc‘t
the example of the sun and the sunshine is given. As the sun is situated in one
place but is illuminating the whole universe, so a small particle of spirit soul,
although situated in the heart of this body, is illuminating the whole body by
consciousness. Thus consciousness is the proof of the presence of the soul, as
sunshine or light is the proof of the presence of the sun. When the soul is
present in the body, there is consciousness all over the body, and as soon as the
soul has passed from the body there is no more consciousness. This can be
easily understood by any intelligent man. Therefore consciousness is not a
product of the combinations of matter. It is the symptom of the living entity.
The consciousness of the living entity, although qualitatively one with the
supreme consciousness, is not supreme, because the consciousness of one
particular body does not share that of another body. But the Supersoul, which
is situated in all bodies as the friend of the individual soul, is conscious of all
bodies. That is the difference between supreme consciousness and individual
consciousness.

TEXT 35

MWWWI
mﬁaﬁﬁﬁﬁfﬁrﬁmnaxu



ksetra—ksetrajﬁayor evam
antaram jﬁc‘ma—caksusc‘t

bhﬁta—prakrti—moksam ca
ye vidm yc‘mti te param

SYNONYMS

ksetra—of the body; ksetra-jﬁayoh—of the proprietor of the body; evam—thus;
antaram—the difference; jﬁc‘ma—caksusc‘t—by the Vision of knowledge;
thZta—of the living entity; prakrti—from material nature; moksam—the
liberation; ca—also; ye—those who; Uiduh—know; yc'mti—approach; te—they;
param—the Supreme.

TRANSLATION

Those who see with eyes of knowledge the difference between the body and
the knower of the body, and can also understand the process of liberation from
bondage in material nature, attain to the supreme goal.

PURPORT

The purport of this Thirteenth Chapter is that one should know the
distinction between the body, the owner of the body, and the Supersoul. One
should recognize the process of liberation, as described in verses eight through
twelve. Then one can go on to the supreme destination.

A faithful person should at first have some good association to hear of God
and thus gradually become enlightened. If one accepts a spiritual master, one
can learn to distinguish between matter and spirit, and that becomes the
steppingstone for further spiritual realization. A spiritual master, by various
instructions, teaches his students to get free from the material concept of life.
For instance, in Bhagavad-gitc‘t we find Krsna instructing Arjuna to free him
from materialistic considerations.

One can understand that this body is matter; it can be analyzed with its
twenty-four elements. The body is the gross manifestation. And the subtle



manifestation is the mind and psychological effects. And the symptoms of life
are the interaction of these features. But over and above this, there is the soul,
and there is also the Supersoul. The soul and the Supersoul are two. This
material world is working by the conjunction of the soul and the twenty-four
material elements. One who can see the constitution of the whole material
manifestation as this combination of the soul and material elements and can
also see the situation of the Supreme Soul becomes eligible for transfer to the
spiritual world. These things are meant for contemplation and for realization,
and one should have a complete understanding of this chapter with the help of
the spiritual master.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Thirteenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Nature, the Enjoyer and Consciousness.

 

The Three Modes Of Material Nature

TEXT 1

WI
qiwiqzuamﬁammiamaﬁmI
wwzﬁqﬁﬁrﬁgﬁﬁtwunu

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
param bhﬁyah pravaksyc‘tmi
jﬁc‘mc‘mc‘tm jﬁc‘mam uttamam
yaj jﬁc‘ttvc‘t munayah sarve



parc‘tm siddhim ito gatc‘th

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
param—transcendental; bhﬁyah—again; pravaksyc‘tmi—I shall speak;
jﬁc‘mc‘mc‘tm—of all knowledge; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; uttamam—the supreme;
yat—which; jﬁc‘ttvc‘I—knowing; munayah—the sages; sarve—all;
parc‘tm—transcendental; siddhim—perfection; itah—from this world;
gatdh—attained.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Again I shall declare to you this
supreme wisdom, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have
attained the supreme perfection.

PURPORT

From the Seventh Chapter to the end of the Twelfth Chapter, Sri Krsna in
detail reveals the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now,
the Lord Himself is further enlightening Arjuna. If one understands this
chapter through the process of philosophical speculation, he will come to an
understanding of devotional serVice. In the Thirteenth Chapter, it was clearly
explained that by humbly developing knowledge one may possibly be freed
from material entanglement. It has also been explained that it is due to
association with the modes of nature that the living entity is entangled in this
material world. Now, in this chapter, the Supreme Personality explains what
those modes of nature are, how they act, how they bind and how they give
liberation. The knowledge explained in this chapter is proclaimed by the
Supreme Lord to be superior to the knowledge given so far in other chapters.
By understanding this knowledge, various great sages attained perfection and
transferred to the spiritual world. The Lord now explains the same knowledge
in a better way. This knowledge is far, far superior to all other processes of



knowledge thus far explained, and knowing this many attained perfection.
Thus it is expected that one who understands this Fourteenth Chapter will
attain perfection.

TEXT 2

EWWWH
aﬁﬁﬁmﬁmﬁswﬁralmu

idam jﬁc‘mam upc‘ts’ritya
mama sc‘tdharmyam c‘tgatc‘th
sarge ’pi nopajc‘tyante
pralaye ha vyathcmti ca

SYNONYMS

idam—this; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; upc‘ts’ritya—taking shelter of; mama—My;
sc‘tdharmyam—same nature; c‘tgatc‘th—having attained; sarge api—even in the
creation; na—never; upajc‘tyante—are born; pralaye—in the annihilation;
na—nor; vyathcmti—are disturbed; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

By becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the transcendental
nature like My own. Thus established, one is not born at the time of creation or
disturbed at the time of dissolution.

PURPORT

After acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires qualitative
equality with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becoming free from the
repetition of birth and death. One does not, however, lose his identity as an
individual soul. It is understood from Vedic literature that the liberated souls
who have reached the transcendental planets of the spiritual sky always look



to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, being engaged in His transcendental
loving serVice. So, even after liberation, the devotees do not lose their
individual identities.

Generally, in the material world, whatever knowledge we get is
contaminated by the three modes of material nature. Knowledge which is not
contaminated by the three modes of nature is called transcendental
knowledge. As soon as one is situated in that transcendental knowledge, he is
on the same platform as the Supreme Person. Those who have no knowledge of
the spiritual sky hold that after being freed from the material activities of the
material form, this spiritual identity becomes formless, without any
variegatedness. However, just as there is material variegatedness in this world,
in the spiritual world there is also variegatedness. Those in ignorance of this
think that spiritual existence is opposed to material variety. But actually, in
the spiritual sky, one attains a spiritual form. There are spiritual activities, and
the spiritual situation is called devotional life. That atmosphere is said to be
uncontaminated, and there one is equal in quality with the Supreme Lord. To
obtain such knowledge, one must develop all the spiritual qualities. One who
thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either by the creation or by
the destruction of the material world.

TEXT 3

WWWWI
Wza—oﬁﬁmiaa‘rnaﬁramuau

mama yom'r mahad brahma
tasmin garbham dadhc‘tmy aham
sambhavah sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm
tato bhavati bhc‘trata

SYNONYMS

mama—My; yom'h—source of birth; mahat—the total material existence;



brahma—supreme; tasmin—in that; garbham—pregnancy; dadhc‘tmi—create;
aham—I; sambhavah—the possibility; sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm—of all living entities;
tatah—thereafter; bhavati—becomes; bhc‘trata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

The total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth, and it is
that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births of all living beings,
0 son of Bharata.

PURPORT

This is an explanation of the world: everything that takes place is due to
the combination of ksetm and ksetTa-jﬁa, the body and the spirit soul. This
combination of material nature and the living entity is made possible by the
Supreme God Himself. The mahat-tattva is the total cause of the total cosmic
manifestation; and that total substance of the material cause, in which there
are three modes of nature, is sometimes called Brahman. The Supreme
Personality impregnates that total substance, and thus innumerable universes
become possible. This total material substance, the mahat-tattva, is described as
Brahman in the Vedic literature (Mandala Upam'saa 1.1.19): tasmc‘td etad
brahma nc‘tma-rﬁpam annam ca jc‘tyate. The Supreme Person impregnates that
Brahman with the seeds of the living entities. The twenty-four elements,
beginning from earth, water, fire and air, are all material energy, and they
constitute what is called mahad brahma, or the great Brahman, the material
nature. As explained in the Seventh Chapter, beyond this there is another,
superior nature—the living entity. Into material nature the superior nature is
mixed by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thereafter all
living entities are born of this material nature.

The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is said that the
scorpion is born out of rice. But the rice is not the cause of the scorpion.
Actually, the eggs were laid by the mother. Similarly, material nature is not
the cause of the birth of the living entities. The seed is given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and they only seem to come out as products of



material nature. Thus every living entity, according to his past activities, has a
different body, created by this material nature, so that the entity can enjoy or
suffer according to his past deeds. The Lord is the cause of all the
manifestations of living entities in this material world.

TEXT 4

aﬁﬁgﬁéwﬁawmaﬁwmzl
amiaanaa‘rﬁzﬁa‘lwﬂﬁmueu

sarva—yonisu kaunteya
mﬁrtayah sambhavanti yc‘th
tc‘tsc‘tm brahma mahad yom'r

aham bija—pradah pita

SYNONYMS

sarva—yonisu—in all species of life; kaunteya—O son of Kunti;
mﬁrtayah—forms; sambhavanti—they appear; yt‘th—which; tc‘tsc‘tm—of all of
them; brahma—the supreme; mahat yom'h—source of birth in the material
substance; aham—I; bija-pradah—the seed-giving; pitc‘t—father.

TRANSLATION
It should be understood that all species of life, 0 son of Kunti, are made

possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly explained that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, is the original father of all living entities. The living entities
are combinations of the material nature and the spiritual nature. Such living
entities are seen not only on this planet but on every planet, even on the
highest, where Brahma is situated. Everywhere there are living entities; within



the earth there are living entities, even within water and within fire. All these
appearances are due to the mother, material nature, and Krsna’s seed-giving
process. The purport is that the material world is impregnated with living
entities, who come out in various forms at the time of creation according to
their past deeds.

TEXT 5

aﬁmsﬁwzﬁﬁanwm
WWéﬁﬁWuxu

sattvam rajas tama iti
gunc‘th prakrti—sambhavc‘th
nibadhnanti mahc‘I-bc‘tho
dehe dehinam avyayam

SYNONYMS

sattvam—the mode of goodness; rajah—the mode of passion; tamah—the
mode of ignorance; iti—thus; gunc‘th—the qualities; prakrti—material nature;
sambhavc‘th—produced of; nibadhmmti—do condition; mahc‘I-bc‘tho—O
mighty-armed one; dehe—in this body; dehinam—the living entity;
avyayam—eternal.

TRANSLATION

Material nature consists of three modes—goodness, passion and ignorance.
When the eternal living entity comes in contact with nature, 0 mighty-armed
Arjuna, he becomes conditioned by these modes.

PURPORT

The living entity, because he is transcendental, has nothing to do with this
material nature. Still, because he has become conditioned by the material



world, he is acting under the spell of the three modes of material nature.
Because living entities have different kinds of bodies, in terms of the different
aspects of nature, they are induced to act according to that nature. This is the
cause of the varieties of happiness and distress.

TEXT 6

aﬁﬁWI

WWWWIIﬁH

tatra sattvam nirmalatvc‘tt
prakc‘ts’akam anc‘tmayam

sukha-sahgena badhnc‘tti

jﬁc‘ma-sahgena cc‘magha

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; sattvam—the mode of goodness; nirmalawc‘tt—being purest in
the material world; prakc‘ts’akam—illuminating; anc‘tmayam—without any sinful
reaction; sukha—with happiness; sahgena—by association;
badhm‘tti—conditions; jﬁc‘ma—with knowledge; sahgena—by association;
ca—also; anagha—O sinless one.

TRANSLATION

O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is
illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those situated in that
mode become conditioned by a sense of happiness and knowledge.

PURPORT

The living entities conditioned by material nature are of various types. One
is happy, another is very active, and another is helpless. All these types of
psychological manifestations are causes of the entities’ conditioned status in



nature. How they are differently conditioned is explained in this section of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The mode of goodness is first considered. The effect of
developing the mode of goodness in the material world is that one becomes
wiser than those otherwise conditioned. A man in the mode of goodness is not
so much affected by material miseries, and he has a sense of advancement in
material knowledge. The representative type is the brc‘thmana, who is supposed
to be situated in the mode of goodness. This sense of happiness is due to
understanding that, in the mode of goodness, one is more or less free from
sinful reactions. Actually, in the Vedic literature it is said that the mode of
goodness means greater knowledge and a greater sense of happiness.

The difficulty here is that when a living entity is situated in the mode of
goodness he becomes conditioned to feel that he is advanced in knowledge and
is better than others. In this way he becomes conditioned. The best examples
are the scientist and the philosopher. Each is very proud of his knowledge, and
because they generally improve their living conditions, they feel a sort of
material happiness. This sense of advanced happiness in conditioned life
makes them bound by the mode of goodness of material nature. As such, they
are attracted toward working in the mode of goodness, and, as long as they
have an attraction for working in that way, they have to take some type of
body in the modes of nature. Thus there is no likelihood of liberation, or of
being transferred to the spiritual world. Repeatedly one may become a
philosopher, a scientist or a poet, and repeatedly become entangled in the same
disadvantages of birth and death. But, due to the illusion of the material
energy, one thinks that that sort of life is pleasant.

TEXT 7

@WﬁrﬁgWI
aﬁawﬁrﬁﬁwmé‘ﬁéﬁﬁttueu

rajo rc‘tgc‘ttmakam viddhi
trsnc‘I—sahga—samudbhavam
tcm nibadhnc‘tti kaunteya



karma-sahgena dehinam

SYNONYMS

rajah—the mode of passion; rc‘tga—c‘ttmakam—born of desire or lust;
Uiddhi—know; trsnc‘t—with hankering; sahga—association;
samudbhavam—produced of; tat—that; nibadhnc‘tti—binds; kaunteya—O son
of Kunti; karma—sahgena—by association with fruitive activity; dehinam—the

embodied.

TRANSLATION

The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, 0 son of
Kunti, and because of this the embodied living entity is bound to material
fruitive actions.

PURPORT

The mode of passion is characterized by the attraction between man and
woman. Woman has attraction for man, and man has attraction for woman.
This is called the mode of passion. And when the mode of passion is increased,
one develops the hankering for material enjoyment. He wants to enjoy sense
gratification. For sense gratification, a man in the mode of passion wants some
honor in society, or in the nation, and he wants to have a happy family, with
nice children, wife and house. These are the products of the mode of passion.
As long as one is hankering after these things, he has to work very hard.
Therefore it is clearly stated here that he becomes associated with the fruits of
his activities and thus becomes bound by such activities. In order to please his
wife, children and society and to keep up his prestige, one has to work.
Therefore, the whole material world is more or less in the mode of passion.
Modern civilization is considered to be advanced in the standard of the mode
of passion. Formerly, the advanced condition was considered to be in the mode
of goodness. If there is no liberation for those in the mode of goodness, what to
speak of those who are entangled in the mode of passion?



TEXT 8
mmmmmmI
mmmﬁmﬁaﬁawﬁmuw

tamas tv ajﬁc‘ma—jam viddhi
mohanam sarva—dehim‘tm
pramc‘tddlasya-nidrc‘tbhis
tcm nibadhnc‘tti bhc‘trata

SYNONYMS

tamah—the mode of ignorance; tu—but; ajﬁc'ma-jam—produced of ignorance;
Uiddhi—know; mohcmam—the delusion; sarva—dehinc‘tm—of all embodied
beings; pramc‘tda—with madness; c‘tlasya—indolence; nidrc‘tbhih—and sleep;
tat—that; nibadhnc‘tti—binds; bhc‘trata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Bharata, know that the mode of darkness, born of ignorance, is the
delusion of all embodied living entities. The results of this mode are madness,
indolence and sleep, which bind the conditioned soul.

PURPORT

In this verse the specific application of the word tu is very significant. This
means that the mode of ignorance is a very peculiar qualification of the
embodied soul. The mode of ignorance is just the opposite of the mode of
goodness. In the mode of goodness, by development of knowledge, one can
understand what is what, but the mode of ignorance is just the opposite.
Everyone under the spell of the mode of ignorance becomes mad, and a
madman cannot understand what is what. Instead of making advancement,
one becomes degraded. The definition of the mode of ignorance is stated in



the Vedic literature. Vastu—yc‘tthc‘ttmya—jﬁc‘mc‘warakam viparyaya—jﬁc‘ma—janakam
tamah: under the spell of ignorance, one cannot understand a thing as it is. For
example, everyone can see that his grandfather has died and therefore he will
also die; man is mortal. The children that he conceives will also die. 80 death is
sure. Still, people are madly accumulating money and working very hard all
day and night, not caring for the eternal spirit. This is madness. In their
madness, they are very reluctant to make advancement in spiritual
understanding. Such people are very lazy. When they are invited to associate
for spiritual understanding, they are not much interested. They are not even
active like the man who is controlled by the mode of passion. Thus another
symptom of one embedded in the mode of ignorance is that he sleeps more
than is required. Six hours of sleep is sufficient, but a man in the mode of
ignorance sleeps at least ten or twelve hours a day. Such a man appears to be
always dejected and is addicted to intoxicants and sleeping. These are the
symptoms of a person conditioned by the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 9

aﬁmﬁmﬁmmml
WQWWWIIQII

sattvam sukhe saﬁjayati
rajah karmani bhc‘trata

jﬁc‘mam c‘wrtya tu tamah
pramc‘tde saﬁjayaty uta

SYNONYMS

sattvam—the mode of goodness; sukhe—in happiness; saﬁjayati—binds;
rajah—the mode of passion; karmani—in fruitive activity; bhc‘trata—O son of
Bharata; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; c‘wrtya—covering; tu—but; tamah—the mode of
ignorance; pramc‘tde—in madness; saﬁjayati—binds; uta—it is said.



TRANSLATION

0 son of Bharata, the mode of goodness conditions one to happiness; passion
conditions one to fruitive action; and ignorance, covering one’s knowledge,
binds one to madness.

PURPORT

A person in the mode of goodness is satisfied by his work or intellectual
pursuit, just as a philosopher, scientist or educator may be engaged in a
particular field of knowledge and may be satisfied in that way. A man in the
mode of passion may be engaged in fruitive activity; he owns as much as he can
and spends for good causes. Sometimes he tries to open hospitals, give to
charity institutions, etc. These are signs of one in the mode of passion. And
the mode of ignorance covers knowledge. In the mode of ignorance, whatever
one does is good neither for him nor for anyone.

TEXT 10

WWWWWI
ﬁzar—oranﬁaanzar—ormmuwu

rajas tamas’ cc‘tbhibhﬁya

sattvam bhavati bhc‘trata
rajah sattvam tamas’ caiva
tamah sattvam rajas tathd

SYNONYMS

Tajah—the mode of passion; tamah—the mode of ignorance; ca—also;
abhibhﬁya—surpassing; sattvam—the mode of goodness; bhavati—becomes
prominent; bhc‘tmta—O son of Bharata; Tajah—the mode of passion;
sattvam—the mode of goodness; tamah—the mode of ignorance; ca—also;



eva—like that; tamah—the mode of ignorance; sattvam—the mode of
goodness; Tajah—the mode of passion; tathc't—thus.

TRANSLATION

Sometimes the mode of goodness becomes prominent, defeating the modes of
passion and ignorance, 0 son of Bharata. Sometimes the mode of passion defeats
goodness and ignorance, and at other times ignorance defeats goodness and
passion. In this way there is always competition for supremacy.

PURPORT

When the mode of passion is prominent, the modes of goodness and
ignorance are defeated. When the mode of goodness is prominent, passion and
ignorance are defeated. And when the mode of ignorance is prominent,
passion and goodness are defeated. This competition is always going on.
Therefore, one who is actually intent on advancing in Krsna consciousness has
to transcend these three modes. The prominence of some certain mode of
nature is manifested in one’s dealings, in his activities, in eating, etc. All this
will be explained in later chapters. But if one wants, he can develop, by
practice, the mode of goodness and thus defeat the modes of ignorance and
passion. One can similarly develop the mode of passion and defeat goodness
and ignorance. Or one can develop the mode of ignorance and defeat goodness
and passion. Although there are these three modes of material nature, if one is
determined he can be blessed by the mode of goodness, and by transcending
the mode of goodness he can be situated in pure goodness, which is called the
vasudeva state, a state in which one can understand the science of God. By the
manifestation of particular activities, it can be understood in what mode of
nature one is situated.

TEXT 11

mﬁsmmmmﬁI



aﬁmmﬁmﬁqﬁmﬁmuwu

sarva—dvc‘tresu dehe ’smin
prakc‘ts’a upajc‘tyate

jﬁc‘mam yadc‘t tadc‘t vidyc‘td

vivrddham sattvam ity uta

SYNONYMS

sarva—dvc‘tresu—in all the gates; dehe asmin—in this body; prakc‘ts’ah—the
quality of illumination; upajc'tyate—develops; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
yada‘t—when; tada—at that time; Vidyat—know; Uivrddham—increased;
sattvam—the mode of goodness; iti uta—thus it is said.

TRANSLATION

The manifestations of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all the
gates of the body are illuminated by knowledge.

PURPORT

There are nine gates in the body: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the
mouth, the genitals and the anus. When every gate is illuminated by the
symptoms of goodness, it should be understood that one has developed the
mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, one can see things in the right
position, one can hear things in the right position, and one can taste things in
the right position. One becomes cleansed inside and outside. In every gate
there is development of the symptoms of happiness, and that is the position of
goodness.

TEXT 12

aﬁnmqﬁamzmzqsrl



WWWWIHQII

lobhah pravrttir c‘trambhah
karmanc‘tm as’amah sprhc‘t
rajasy etc‘mi jc‘tycmte
vivrddhe bharatarsabha

SYNONYMS

lobhah—greed; pravrttih—activity; c‘trambhah—endeavor; karmanc‘tm—in
activities; as’amah—uncontrollable; sprhc‘t—desire; rajasi—of the mode of
passion; etc'mi—all these; jc'tycmte—develop; Uivrddhe—when there is an excess;
bharata—Tsabha—O chief of the descendants of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

O chief of the Bharatas, when there is an increase in the mode of passion the
symptoms of great attachment, fruitive activity, intense endeavor, and
uncontrollable desire and hankering develop.

PURPORT

One in the mode of passion is never satisfied with the position he has
already acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants to construct a
residential house, he tries his best to have a palatial house, as if he would be
able to reside in that house eternally. And he develops a great hankering for
sense gratification. There is no end to sense gratification. He always wants to
remain with his family and in his house and to continue the process of sense
gratification. There is no cessation of this. All these symptoms should be
understood as characteristic of the mode of passion.

TEXT 13

msnﬁramtﬁaqam



WWWWH‘IBH

aprakc‘ts’o ’pravrttis’ ca

pramc‘tdo moha eva ca

tamasy etc‘mi jc‘tycmte
vivrddhe kuru—nandana

SYNONYMS

aprakc‘ts’ah—darkness; apravrttih—inactivity; ca—and; pramc‘tdah—madness;
mohah—illusion; eva—certainly; ca—also; tamasi—the mode of ignorance;
etc‘mi—these; jc‘tycmte—are manifested; vivrddhe—when developed;
kuru—nandana—O son of Kuru.

TRANSLATION

When there is an increase in the mode of ignorance, 0 son of Kuru,
darkness, inertia, madness and illusion are manifested.

PURPORT

When there is no illumination, knowledge is absent. One in the mode of
ignorance does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to act whimsically,
for no purpose. Even though he has the capacity to work, he makes no
endeavor. This is called illusion. Although consciousness is going on, life is
inactive. These are the symptoms of one in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 14

maﬁaqﬁgmmﬁraeﬁI
aﬁmﬁaf II98II

yadc‘t sattve pravrddhe tu
pralayam yc‘tti deha—bhrt



tadottama—vidt‘tm lokc‘m
amalc‘m pratipadyate

SYNONYMS

yada‘t—when; sattve—the mode of goodness; pravrddhe—developed; tu—but;
pralayam—dissolution; yc‘tti—goes; deha-tht—the embodied; tada—at that
time; uttama—vidt‘tm—of the great sages; lokc‘m—the planets; amalc‘m—pure;
pratipadyate—attains.

TRANSLATION

When one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher planets
of the great sages.

PURPORT

One in goodness attains higher planetary systems, like Brahmaloka or
]anoloka, and there enjoys godly happiness. The word amalc‘m is significant; it
means “free from the modes of passion and ignorance.” There are impurities in
the material world, but the mode of goodness is the purest form of existence in
the material world. There are different kinds of planets for different kinds of
living entities. Those who die in the mode of goodness are elevated to the
planets where great sages and great devotees live.

TEXT 15

WWWWWI
amuzﬁaanﬁrqga‘rﬁgamﬁuwu

rajasi pralayam gatvc‘t
karma—sahgisu jc‘tyate
tathd pralinas tamasi
mﬁdha—yonisu jc‘tyate



SYNONYMS

rajasi—in passion; pralayam—dissolution; gatvc‘I—attaining;
karma-sahgisu—in the association of those engaged in fruitive activities;
jc‘tyate—takes birth; tathc‘I—similarly; pralinah—being dissolved; tamasi—in
ignorance; mﬁdha—yonisu—in animal species; jc‘tyate—takes birth.

TRANSLATION

When one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those engaged
in fruitive activities; and when one dies in the mode of ignorance, he takes
birth in the animal kingdom.

PURPORT

Some people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform
of human life it never goes down again. This is incorrect. According to this
verse, if one develops the mode of ignorance, after his death he is degraded to
an animal form of life. From there one has to again elevate himself, by an
evolutionary process, to come again to the human form of life. Therefore,
those who are actually serious about human life should take to the mode of
goodness and in good association transcend the modes and become situated in
Krsna consciousness. This is the aim of human life. Otherwise, there is no
guarantee that the human being will again attain to the human status.

TEXT 16

W: m: HTREW’ ﬁﬁa’s WI
W W $131431? 31:13: W" 75 ll
karmanah sukrtasyc‘thuh

sc‘tttvikam nirmalam phalam
rajasas tu phalam duhkham



ajﬁc‘mam tamasah phalam

SYNONYMS

karmanah—of work; su—krtasya—pious; c‘thuh—is said; sc‘tttvikam—in the mode
of goodness; nirmalam—purified; phalam—the result; rajasah—of the mode of
passion; tu—but; phalam—the result; duhkham—misery; ajﬁc‘mam—nonsense;
tamasah—of the mode of ignorance; phalam—the result.

TRANSLATION

The result of pious action is pure and is said to be in the mode of goodness.
But action done in the mode of passion results in misery, and action performed
in the mode of ignorance results in foolishness.

PURPORT

The result of pious activities in the mode of goodness is pure. Therefore the
sages, who are free from all illusion, are situated in happiness. But activities in
the mode of passion are simply miserable. Any activity for material happiness
is bound to be defeated. If, for example, one wants to have a skyscraper, so
much human misery has to be undergone before a big skyscraper can be built.
The financier has to take much trouble to earn a mass of wealth, and those
who are slaving to construct the building have to render physical toil. The
miseries are there. Thus Bhagavad-gitc‘t says that in any activity performed
under the spell of the mode of passion, there is definitely great misery. There
may be a little so-called mental happiness—“I have this house or this
money”—but this is not actual happiness.

As far as the mode of ignorance is concerned, the performer is without
knowledge, and therefore all his activities result in present misery, and
afterwards he will go on toward animal life. Animal life is always miserable,
although, under the spell of the illusory energy, mc‘tyc't, the animals do not
understand this. Slaughtering poor animals is also due to the mode of
ignorance. The animal killers do not know that in the future the animal will



have a body suitable to kill them. That is the law of nature. In human society,
if one kills a man he has to be hanged. That is the law of the state. Because of
ignorance, people do not perceive that there is a complete state controlled by
the Supreme Lord. Every living creature is a son of the Supreme Lord, and He
does not tolerate even an ant’s being killed. One has to pay for it. So
indulgence in animal killing for the taste of the tongue is the grossest kind of
ignorance. A human being has no need to kill animals, because God has
supplied so many nice things. If one indulges in meat-eating anyway, it is to be
understood that he is acting in ignorance and is making his future very dark.
Of all kinds of animal killing, the killing of cows is most Vicious because the
cow gives us all kinds of pleasure by supplying milk. Cow slaughter is an act of
the grossest type of ignorance. In the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 9.4.64) the
words gobhih prinita-matsaram indicate that one who, being fully satisfied by
milk, is desirous of killing the cow is in the grossest ignorance. There is also a
prayer in the Vedic literature that states:

namo brahmanya—devc‘tya
go—brc‘thmana—hitc‘tya ca
jagad—dhitc‘tya krsnc‘tya
govindaya namo namah

“My Lord, You are the well-wisher of the cows and the brc‘thmanas, and You
are the well-wisher of the entire human society and world.” (Vitsrzu Purina
1.19.65) The purport is that special mention is given in that prayer for the
protection of the cows and the brc‘thmanas. Brdhmanas are the symbol of
spiritual education, and cows are the symbol of the most valuable food; these
two living creatures, the brc‘thmanas and the cows, must be given all
protection—that is real advancement of civilization. In modern human
society, spiritual knowledge is neglected, and cow killing is encouraged. It is to
be understood, then, that human society is advancing in the wrong direction
and is clearing the path to its own condemnation. A civilization which guides
the citizens to become animals in their next lives is certainly not a human
civilization. The present human civilization is, of course, grossly misled by the
modes of passion and ignorance. It is a very dangerous age, and all nations



should take care to provide the easiest process, Krsna consciousness, to save
humanity from the greatest danger.

TEXT 17

mmwamwm
mmmﬁmﬁaaumu

sattvdt saﬁjc‘tyate jﬁc‘mam
rajaso lobha eva ca

pramc‘tda—mohau tamaso

bhavato ’jﬁc‘mam eva ca

SYNONYMS

sattvc'tt—from the mode of goodness; saﬁjc'tyate—develops;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; rajasah—from the mode of passion; lobhah—greed;
eva—certainly; ca—also; pramc‘tda—madness; mohau—and illusion;
tamasah—from the mode of ignorance; bhavatah—develop;
ajﬁc‘mam—nonsense; eva—certainly; ca—also.

TRANSLATION

From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of
passion, greed develops; and from the mode of ignorance develop foolishness,
madness and illusion.

PURPORT

Since the present civilization is not very congenial to the living entities,
Krsna consciousness is recommended. Through Krsna consciousness, society
will develop the mode of goodness. When the mode of goodness is developed,
people will see things as they are. In the mode of ignorance, people are just like
animals and cannot see things clearly. In the mode of ignorance, for example,



they do not see that by killing one animal they are taking the chance of being
killed by the same animal in the next life. Because people have no education in
actual knowledge, they become irresponsible. To stop this irresponsibility,
education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in general must
be there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness, they will
become sober, in full knowledge of things as they are. Then people will be
happy and prosperous. Even if the majority of the people aren’t happy and
prosperous, if a certain percentage of the population develops Krsna
consciousness and becomes situated in the mode of goodness, then there is the
possibility for peace and prosperity all over the world. Otherwise, if the world
is devoted to the modes of passion and ignorance, there can be no peace or
prosperity. In the mode of passion, people become greedy, and their hankering
for sense enjoyment has no limit. One can see that even if one has enough
money and adequate arrangements for sense gratification, there is neither
happiness nor peace of mind. That is not possible, because one is situated in
the mode of passion. If one wants happiness at all, his money will not help him;
he has to elevate himself to the mode of goodness by practicing Krsna
consciousness. When one is engaged in the mode of passion, not only is he
mentally unhappy, but his profession and occupation are also very
troublesome. He has to devise so many plans and schemes to acquire enough
money to maintain his status quo. This is all miserable. In the mode of
ignorance, people become mad. Being distressed by their circumstances, they
take shelter of intoxication, and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their
future in life is very dark.

TEXT 18

wmamnﬁﬁsﬁamzl
WMWWHIFII

mdhvam gacchcmti sattva—sthc‘t
madhye tisthcmti rc‘tjasc‘th
jaghanya—guna—vrtti—sthc‘t



adho gacchcmti tc‘tmasc‘th

SYNONYMS

mdhvam—upwards; gacchcmti—go; sattva-sthc‘Ih—those situated in the mode of
goodness; madhye—in the middle; tisthcmti—dwell; rc‘tjasc‘Ih—those situated in
the mode of passion; jaghcmya—of abominable; guna—quality;
vrtti—sthc‘Ih—whose occupation; adhah—down; gacchcmti—go;
tc'tmasc'th—persons in the mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher
planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those in
the abominable mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds.

PURPORT

In this verse the results of actions in the three modes of nature are more
explicitly set forth. There is an upper planetary system, consisting of the
heavenly planets, where everyone is highly elevated. According to the degree
of development of the mode of goodness, the living entity can be transferred to
various planets in this system. The highest planet is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka,
where the prime person of this universe, Lord Brahma, resides. We have seen
already that we can hardly calculate the wondrous condition of life in
Brahmaloka, but the highest condition of life, the mode of goodness, can bring
us to this.

The mode of passion is mixed. It is in the middle, between the modes of
goodness and ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if he should be
purely in the mode of passion, he will simply remain on this earth as a king or a
rich man. But because there are mixtures, one can also go down. People on this
earth, in the mode of passion or ignorance, cannot forcibly approach the
higher planets by machine. In the mode of passion, there is also the chance of
becoming mad in the next life.



The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here as abominable.
The result of developing ignorance is very, very risky. It is the lowest quality in
material nature. Beneath the human level there are eight million species of
life—birds, beasts, reptiles, trees, etc.—and according to the development of
the mode of ignorance, people are brought down to these abominable
conditions. The word tc'tmasc'th is very significant here. Tamasc'th indicates
those who stay continuously in the mode of ignorance without rising to a
higher mode. Their future is very dark.

There is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passion to
be elevated to the mode of goodness, and that system is called Krsna
consciousness. But one who does not take advantage of this opportunity will
certainly continue in the lower modes.

TEXT 19

WW:WWWI
Wauiéﬁrngﬁﬁismﬁruwu

nc‘myam gunebhyah kartc‘tram
yadc‘t drastc‘mupas’yati
gunebhyas’ ca param vetti
mad—bhc‘wam so ’dhigacchati

SYNONYMS

na—no; anyam—other; gunebhyah—than the qualities; kartc‘tram—performer;
yada‘t—when; drastc‘t—a seer; anupas’yati—sees properly; gunebhyah—to the
modes of nature; ca—and; param—transcendental; vetti—knows;
mat—bhc‘wam—to My spiritual nature; sah—he; adhigacchati—is promoted.

TRANSLATION

When one properly sees that in all activities no other performer is at work
than these modes of nature and he knows the Supreme Lord, who is



transcendental to all these modes, he attains My spiritual nature.

PURPORT

One can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature simply
by understanding them properly by learning from the proper souls. The real
spiritual master is Krsna, and He is imparting this spiritual knowledge to
Arjuna. Similarly, it is from those who are fully in Krsna consciousness that
one has to learn this science of activities in terms of the modes of nature.
Otherwise, one’s life will be misdirected. By the instruction of a bona fide
spiritual master, a living entity can know of his spiritual position, his material
body, his senses, how he is entrapped, and how he is under the spell of the
material modes of nature. He is helpless, being in the grip of these modes, but
when he can see his real position, then he can attain to the transcendental
platform, having the scope for spiritual life. Actually, the living entity is not
the performer of different activities. He is forced to act because he is situated
in a particular type of body, conducted by some particular mode of material
nature. Unless one has the help of spiritual authority, he cannot understand in
what position he is actually situated. With the association of a bona fide
spiritual master, he can see his real position, and by such an understanding he
can become fixed in full Krsna consciousness. A man in Krsna consciousness is
not controlled by the spell of the material modes of nature. It has already been
stated in the Seventh Chapter that one who has surrendered to Krsna is
relieved from the activities of material nature. For one who is able to see
things as they are, the influence of material nature gradually ceases.

TEXT 20

Wendie: aﬁﬁa‘l WI
Wzﬁﬁﬁaﬁsaanaﬁ II 9o II

gunc‘m etc‘m atitya trin
dehi deha—samudbhavc‘m



janma—mrtyu-jarc‘t—duhkhair
Uimukto ’mrtam as’nute

SYNONYMS

gunc‘m—qualities; etc‘m—all these; atitya—transcending; trin—three;
dehi—the embodied; deha—the body; samudbhavc‘m—produced of; janma—of
birth; mrtyu—death; jarc‘t—and old age; duhkhaih—the distresses;
vimuktah—being freed from; amrtam—nectar; as’nute—he enjoys.

TRANSLATION

When the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes associated
with the material body, he can become free from birth, death, old age and their
distresses and can enjoy nectar even in this life.

PURPORT

How one can stay in the transcendental position, even in this body, in full
Krsna consciousness, is explained in this verse. The Sanskrit word dehi means
“embodied.” Although one is within this material body, by his advancement in
spiritual knowledge he can be free from the influence of the modes of nature.
He can enjoy the happiness of spiritual life even in this body because, after
leaving this body, he is certainly going to the spiritual sky. But even in this
body he can enjoy spiritual happiness. In other words, devotional serVice in
Krsna consciousness is the sign of liberation from material entanglement, and
this will be explained in the Eighteenth Chapter. When one is freed from the
inﬂuence of the modes of material nature, he enters into devotional serVice.

TEXT 21

WWI
WWWI



WEIR: 6591’ WW II :29 ||

arjuna uvc‘tca
kair lingais trin gunc‘m etc‘m
atito bhavati prabho
kim c‘tcc‘trah katham caitc‘tms
trin gunan ativartate

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; kaih—by which; lingaih—symptoms; trin—three;
gunc‘m—qualities; etc‘m—all these; atitah—having transcended; bhavati—is;
prabho—O my Lord; kim—what; c‘tcc‘trah—behavior; katham—how; ca—also;
etc‘m—these; trin—three; gunc‘m—qualities; ativartate—transcends.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O my dear Lord, by which symptoms is one known who is
transcendental to these three modes? What is his behavior? And how does he

transcend the modes of nature?

PURPORT

In this verse, Arjuna’s questions are very appropriate. He wants to know the
symptoms of a person who has already transcended the material modes. He
first inquires of the symptoms of such a transcendental person. How can one
understand that he has already transcended the inﬂuence of the modes of
material nature.7 The second question asks how he lives and what his activities
are. Are they regulated or nonregulated? Then Arjuna inquires of the means
by which he can attain the transcendental nature. That is very important.
Unless one knows the direct means by which one can be situated always
transcendentally, there is no possibility of showing the symptoms. 80 all these
questions put by Arjuna are very important, and the Lord answers them.



TEXTS 22—25

WI
WHEERIHWHWI
ﬁﬁawﬁﬁﬁwﬁwgﬁrunu
MWHWI
maﬁasﬁéﬁsaﬁsﬁrﬁaﬁuqsu

WWWHW

WW9 II Q8 ||
WWWWMH

Wilmammﬁuqxu

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
prakc‘ts’am ca pravrttim ca
moham eva ca pc‘mdava
ha dvesti sampravrttc‘mi
ha nivrttc‘mi kahksati

udc‘tsina—vad c‘tsino
gunair yo ha vicalyate
gunc‘t vartcmta ity evam
yo ’Uatisthati nehgate

sama—duhkha—sukhah sva-sthah
sama—lostc‘ts’ma—kc‘tﬁcanah
tulya—priyc‘tpriyo dhiras
tulya—nindt‘ttma—samstutih

mc‘mc‘tpamc‘mayos tulyas

tulyo mitrari—paksayoh

sarvc‘trambha—parityc‘tgi
gunc‘ttitah sa ucyate



SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
prakc‘ts’am—illumination; ca—and; pravrttim—attachment; ca—and;
moham—illusion; eva ca—also; pc‘mdava—O son of Pandu; ha dvesti—does not
hate; sampravrttc‘mi—although developed; ha nivrttc‘mi—nor stopping
development; kahksati—desires; udc‘tsina—vat—as if neutral; c‘tsinah—situated;
gunaih—by the qualities; yah—one who; na—never; vicc‘tlyate—is agitated;
gunc‘th—the qualities; vartcmte—are acting; iti evam—knowing thus; yah—one
who; avatisthati—remains; na—never; ihgate—ﬂickers; sama—equal;
duhkha—in distress; sukhah—and happiness; sva—sthah—being situated in
himself; sama—equally; losta—a lump of earth; as’ma—stone; kc‘tﬁcanah—gold;
tulya—equally disposed; priya—to the dear; apriyah—and the undesirable;
dhirah—steady; tulya—equal; nindc‘t—in defamation; c‘ttma—samstutih—and
praise of himself; mc‘ma—in honor; apamc‘mayoh—and dishonor;
tulyah—equal; tulyah—equal; mitra—of friends; ari—and enemies;
paksayoh—to the parties; sarva—of all; c‘trambha—endeavors;
parityc'tgi—renouncer; guna-atitah—transcendental to the material modes of
nature; sah—he; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 0 son of Pandu, he who does not
hate illumination, attachment and delusion when they are present or long for
them when they disappear; who is unwavering and undisturbed through all
these reactions of the material qualities, remaining neutral and transcendental,
knowing that the modes alone are active; who is situated in the self and regards
alike happiness and distress; who looks upon a lump of earth, a stone and a
piece of gold with an equal eye; who is equal toward the desirable and the
undesirable; who is steady, situated equally well in praise and blame, honor and
dishonor; who treats alike both friend and enemy; and who has renounced all
material activities—such a person is said to have transcended the modes of
nature.



PURPORT

Arjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them one
after another. In these verses, Krsna first indicates that a person
transcendentally situated has no envy and does not hanker for anything.
When a living entity stays in this material world embodied by the material
body, it is to be understood that he is under the control of one of the three
modes of material nature. When he is actually out of the body, then he is out
of the clutches of the material modes of nature. But as long as he is not out of
the material body, he should be neutral. He should engage himself in the
devotional serVice of the Lord so that his identity with the material body will
automatically be forgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he
acts only for sense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to
Krsna, sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need this material
body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of the material body. The
qualities of the material modes in the body will act, but as spirit soul the self is
aloof from such activities. How does he become aloof.7 He does not desire to
enjoy the body, nor does he desire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally
situated, the devotee becomes automatically free. He need not try to become
free from the inﬂuence of the modes of material nature.

The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situated
person. The materially situated person is affected by so-called honor and
dishonor offered to the body, but the transcendentally situated person is not
affected by such false honor and dishonor. He performs his duty in Krsna
consciousness and does not mind whether a man honors or dishonors him. He
accepts things that are favorable for his duty in Krsna consciousness, otherwise
he has no necessity of anything material, either a stone or gold. He takes
everyone as his dear friend who helps him in his execution of Krsna
consciousness, and he does not hate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed
and sees everything on an equal level because he knows perfectly well that he
has nothing to do with material existence. Social and political issues do not
affect him, because he knows the situation of temporary upheavals and
disturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He can attempt



anything for Krsna, but for his personal self he does not attempt anything. By
such behavior one becomes actually transcendentally situated.

TEXT 26

niaﬁssqﬁaﬁwnﬁﬁdﬂﬁﬁam
HWWWIIQSII

mam ca yo ’vyabhicc‘trena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunc‘m samatityaitc‘m
brahma—bhﬁyc‘tya kalpate

SYNONYMS

mc‘tm—unto Me; ca—also; yah—a person who; avyabhicc‘trena—without fail;
bhakti—yogena—by devotional service; sevate—renders service; sah—he;
gunc‘m—the modes of material nature; samatitya—transcending; etc‘m—all
these; brahma-bhﬁyc‘tya—elevated to the Brahman platform; kalpate—becomes.

TRANSLATION

One who engages in full devotional service, unfailing in all circumstances, at
once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of
Brahman.

PURPORT

This verse is a reply to Arjuna’s third question: What is the means of
attaining to the transcendental position.7 As explained before, the material
world is acting under the spell of the modes of material nature. One should not
be disturbed by the activities of the modes of nature; instead of putting his
consciousness into such activities, he may transfer his consciousness to Krsna
activities. Krsna activities are known as bhakti-yoga—always acting for Krsna.



This includes not only Krsna, but His different plenary expansions such as
Rama and Narayana. He has innumerable expansions. One who is engaged in
the serVice of any of the forms of Krsna, or of His plenary expansions, is
considered to be transcendentally situated. One should also note that all the
forms of Krsna are fully transcendental, blissful, full of knowledge and eternal.
Such personalities of Godhead are omnipotent and omniscient, and they
possess all transcendental qualities. So if one engages himself in the serVice of
Krsna or His plenary expansions with unfailing determination, although these
modes of material nature are very difficult to overcome, one can overcome
them easily. This has already been explained in the Seventh Chapter. One
who surrenders unto Krsna at once surmounts the influence of the modes of
material nature. To be in Krsna consciousness or in devotional serVice means
to acquire equality with Krsna. The Lord says that His nature is eternal,
blissful and full of knowledge, and the living entities are part and parcel of the
Supreme, as gold particles are part of a gold mine. Thus the living entity, in his
spiritual position, is as good as gold, as good as Krsna in quality. The difference
of individuality continues, otherwise there would be no question of
bhakti—yoga. Bhakti—yoga means that the Lord is there, the devotee is there and
the activity of exchange of love between the Lord and the devotee is there.
Therefore the individuality of two persons is present in the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the individual person, otherwise there would be
no meaning to bhakti-yoga. If one is not situated in the same transcendental
position with the Lord, one cannot serve the Supreme Lord. To be a personal
assistant to a king, one must acquire the qualifications. Thus the qualification
is to become Brahman, or freed from all material contamination. It is said in
the Vedic literature, brahmaiva scm brahmc‘tpy eti. One can attain the Supreme
Brahman by becoming Brahman. This means that one must qualitatively
become one with Brahman. By attainment of Brahman, one does not lose his
eternal Brahman identity as an individual soul.

TEXT 27

WEWHI



inmauﬁagaﬁmﬁlwauwu

brahmano hi pratisthc‘tham
amrtasyavyayasya ca
s’c‘ts’vatasya ca dharmasya
sukhasyaikc‘mtikasya ca

SYNONYMS

brahmanah—of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi—certainly; pratisthc‘t—the rest;
aham—I am; amrtasya—of the immortal; avyayasya—of the imperishable;
ca—also; s’c‘ts’vatasya—of the eternal; ca—and; dharmasya—of the
constitutional position; sukhasya—of happiness; aikc‘mtikasya—ultimate;
ca—also.

TRANSLATION

And I am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is immortal,
imperishable and eternal and is the constitutional position of ultimate
happiness.

PURPORT

The constitution of Brahman is immortality, imperishability, eternity, and
happiness. Brahman is the beginning of transcendental realization.
Paramatma, the Supersoul, is the middle, the second stage in transcendental
realization, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate realization
of the Absolute Truth. Therefore, both Paramatma and the impersonal
Brahman are within the Supreme Person. It is explained in the Seventh
Chapter that material nature is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the
Supreme Lord. The Lord impregnates the inferior, material nature with
fragments of the superior nature, and that is the spiritual touch in the material
nature. When a living entity conditioned by this material nature begins the
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, he elevates himself from the position of



material existence and gradually rises up to the Brahman conception of the
Supreme. This attainment of the Brahman conception of life is the first stage
in self-realization. At this stage the Brahman-realized person is transcendental
to the material position, but he is not actually perfect in Brahman realization.
If he wants, he can continue to stay in the Brahman position and then
gradually rise up to Paramatma realization and then to the realization of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are many examples of this in Vedic
literature. The four Kumaras were situated first in the impersonal Brahman
conception of truth, but then they gradually rose to the platform of devotional
serVice. One who cannot elevate himself beyond the impersonal conception of
Brahman runs the risk of falling down. In Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that
although a person may rise to the stage of impersonal Brahman, without going
further, with no information of the Supreme Person, his intelligence is not
perfectly clear. Therefore, in spite of being raised to the Brahman platform,
there is the chance of falling down if one is not engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord. In the Vedic language it is also said, raso vai sah, rasam hy
evc‘tyam labdhvc‘mandi bhavati: “When one understands the Personality of
Godhead, the reservoir of pleasure, Krsna, he actually becomes
transcendentally blissful.” (T airtiriya Upam'saa 2.7.1) The Supreme Lord is full
in siX opulences, and when a devotee approaches Him there is an exchange of
these siX opulences. The servant of the king enjoys on an almost equal level
with the king. And so eternal happiness, imperishable happiness, and eternal
life accompany devotional serVice. Therefore, realization of Brahman, or
eternity, or imperishability, is included in devotional serVice. This is already
possessed by a person who is engaged in devotional serVice.

The living entity, although Brahman by nature, has the desire to lord it
over the material world, and due to this he falls down. In his constitutional
position, a living entity is above the three modes of material nature, but
association with material nature entangles him in the different modes of
material nature—goodness, passion and ignorance. Due to the association of
these three modes, his desire to dominate the material world is there. By
engagement in devotional serVice in full Krsna consciousness, he is
immediately situated in the transcendental position, and his unlawful desire to



control material nature is removed. Therefore the process of devotional
serVice, beginning with hearing, chanting, remembering—the prescribed nine
methods for realizing devotional serVice—should be practiced in the
association of devotees. Gradually, by such association, by the influence of the
spiritual master, one’s material desire to dominate is removed, and one
becomes firmly situated in the Lord’s transcendental loving serVice. This
method is prescribed from the twenty-second to the last verse of this chapter.
Devotional serVice to the Lord is very simple: one should always engage in the
serVice of the Lord, should eat the remnants of foodstuffs offered to the Deity,
smell the flowers offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, see the places where the
Lord had His transcendental pastimes, read of the different activities of the
Lord, His reciprocation of love with His devotees, chant always the
transcendental Vibration Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and observe the fasting days
commemorating the appearances and disappearances of the Lord and His
devotees. By following such a process one becomes completely detached from
all material activities. One who can thus situate himself in the brahmajyoti or
the different varieties of the Brahman conception is equal to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in quality.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the F ourteenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Three Modes of Material Nature.

The Yoga of the Supreme Person

 

TEXT 1



WI
WWWWWI
WWWWQEHWMII

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
mdhva-mﬁlam adhah-s’c‘tkham
as’vattham prc‘thur avyayam
chande‘tmsi yasya pamc‘mi
yas tam veda sa veda—Uit

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
mdhva—mﬁlam—with roots above; adhah—downwards; s’c‘tkham—branches;
as’vattham—a banyan tree; prc‘thuh—is said; avyayam—eternal;
chande‘tmsi—the Vedic hymns; yasya—of which; pamc‘mi—the leaves;
yah—anyone who; tam—that; veda—knows; sah—he; veda—vit—the knower of
the Vedas.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: It is said that there is an
imperishable banyan tree that has its roots upward and its branches down and
whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. One who knows this tree is the knower of

the Vedas.

PURPORT

After the discussion of the importance of bhakti-yoga, one may question,
“What about the Vedas?” It is explained in this chapter that the purpose of
Vedic study is to understand Krsna. Therefore one who is in Krsna
consciousness, who is engaged in devotional serVice, already knows the Vedas.

The entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyan tree.
For one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end to the banyan



tree. He wanders from one branch to another, to another, to another. The tree
of this material world has no end, and for one who is attached to this tree,
there is no possibility of liberation. The Vedic hymns, meant for elevating
oneself, are called the leaves of this tree. This tree’s roots grow upward because
they begin from where Brahma is located, the topmost planet of this universe.
If one can understand this indestructible tree of illusion, then one can get out
of it.

This process of extrication should be understood. In the previous chapters it
has been explained that there are many processes by which to get out of the
material entanglement. And, up to the Thirteenth Chapter, we have seen that
devotional serVice to the Supreme Lord is the best way. Now, the basic
principle of devotional serVice is detachment from material activities and
attachment to the transcendental serVice of the Lord. The process of breaking
attachment to the material world is discussed in the beginning of this chapter.
The root of this material existence grows upward. This means that it begins
from the total material substance, from the topmost planet of the universe.
From there, the whole universe is expanded, with so many branches,
representing the various planetary systems. The fruits represent the results of
the living entities’ activities, namely, religion, economic development, sense
gratification and liberation.

Now, there is no ready experience in this world of a tree situated with its
branches down and its roots upward, but there is such a thing. That tree can be
found beside a reservoir of water. We can see that the trees on the bank reflect
upon the water with their branches down and roots up. In other words, the
tree of this material world is only a reﬂection of the real tree of the spiritual
world. This reflection of the spiritual world is situated on desire, just as a tree’s
reflection is situated on water. Desire is the cause of things’ being situated in
this reﬂected material light. One who wants to get out of this material
existence must know this tree thoroughly through analytical study. Then he
can cut off his relationship with it.

This tree, being the reflection of the real tree, is an exact replica.
Everything is there in the spiritual world. The impersonalists take Brahman to
be the root of this material tree, and from the root, according to Sankhya



philosophy, come prakrti, purusa, then the three gunas, then the five gross
elements (paﬁca—mahd—bhﬁta), then the ten senses (das’endriya), mind, etc. In
this way they divide up the whole material world into twenty-four elements. If
Brahman is the center of all manifestations, then this material world is a
manifestation of the center by 180 degrees, and the other 180 degrees
constitute the spiritual world. The material world is the perverted reﬂection,
so the spiritual world must have the same variegatedness, but in reality. The
prakrti is the external energy of the Supreme Lord, and the purusa is the
Supreme Lord Himself, and that is explained in Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Since this
manifestation is material, it is temporary. A reflection is temporary, for it is
sometimes seen and sometimes not seen. But the origin from whence the
reflection is reﬂected is eternal. The material reﬂection of the real tree has to
be cut off. When it is said that a person knows the Vedas, it is assumed that he
knows how to cut off attachment to this material world. If one knows that
process, he actually knows the Vedas. One who is attracted by the ritualistic
formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the beautiful green leaves of the tree. He
does not exactly know the purpose of the Vedas. The purpose of the Vedas, as
disclosed by the Personality of Godhead Himself, is to cut down this reﬂected
tree and attain the real tree of the spiritual world.

TEXT 2

WWWwwﬁWH
WQWWWIIQII

adhas’ cordhvam prasrtc‘ts tasya s’c‘tkhc‘t
guna—pravrddhc‘t visaya—pravc‘tlc‘th
adhas’ ca mﬁlc‘my anuscmtatc‘mi
karmanubandhini manusya—loke

SYNONYMS

adhah—downward; ca—and; mdhvam—upward; prasrtc‘th—extended;



tasya—its; s’c‘tkhc‘th—branches; guna—by the modes of material nature;
pravrddhc‘th—developed; Visaya—sense objects; pravc‘tlc‘th—twigs;
adhah—downward; ca—and; mﬁlc‘mi—roots; anusantatc‘mi—extended;
karma—to work; anubandhini—bound; manusya-loke—in the world of human
society.

TRANSLATION

The branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the
three modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of the senses. This
tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to the fruitive actions of
human society.

PURPORT

The description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its branches
spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there are variegated manifestations
of living entities—human beings, animals, horses, cows, dogs, cats, etc. These
are situated on the lower parts of the branches, whereas on the upper parts are
higher forms of living entities: the demigods, Gandharvas and many other
higher species of life. As a tree is nourished by water, so this tree is nourished
by the three modes of material nature. Sometimes we find that a tract of land
is barren for want of sufficient water, and sometimes a tract is very green;
similarly, where particular modes of material nature are proportionately
greater in quantity, the different species of life are manifested accordingly.

The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. By
development of the different modes of nature we develop different senses, and
by the senses we enjoy different varieties of sense objects. The tips of the
branches are the senses—the ears, nose, eyes, etc.—which are attached to the
enjoyment of different sense objects. The twigs are sound, form, touch, and so
on—the sense objects. The subsidiary roots are attachments and aversions,
which are byproducts of different varieties of suffering and sense enjoyment.
The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered to develop from these
secondary roots, which spread in all directions. The real root is from



Brahmaloka, and the other roots are in the human planetary systems. After
one enjoys the results of Virtuous activities in the upper planetary systems, he
comes down to this earth and renews his karma, or fruitive activities for
promotion. This planet of human beings is considered the field of activities.

TEXTS 3—4

HWHWWHWHWI
anW—Waﬁﬁmuzu
aazﬁaaﬁmﬁhsdaﬁqﬁmﬁﬁaéﬁawﬁzI
aﬁaaﬁwmuﬁzﬁﬁr:ww0ﬁueu

ha rﬁpam asyeha tathopalabhyate

nc‘mto ha cc‘tdir ha ca sampratisthc‘t
as’vattham enam su—vimdha—mﬁlam

asahga—s’astrena drdhena chittvc‘t

tatah padam tat parimc‘trgitavyam
yasmin gatc‘t ha nivartcmti bhﬁyah
tam eva cc‘tdyam purusam prapadye
yatah pravrttih prasrtc‘t purc‘mi

SYNONYMS

na—not; rﬁpam—the form; asya—of this tree; iha—in this world; tathc‘t—also;
upalabhyate—can be perceived; na—never; antah—end; na—never; ca—also;
c‘tdih—beginning; na—never; ca—also; sampratisthc‘t—the foundation;
as’vattham—banyan tree; enam—this; su-vimdha—strongly; mﬁlam—rooted;
asahga—s’astrena—by the weapon of detachment; drdhena—strong;
chittvc‘t—cutting; tatah—thereafter; padam—situation; tat—that;
parimc‘trgitavyam—has to be searched out; yasmm—where; gatc‘th—going;
na—never; nivartanti—they come back; bhﬁyah—again; tam—to Him;
eva—certainly; ca—also; c‘tdyam—original; purusam—the Personality of
Godhead; prapadye—surrender; yatah—from whom; pravrttih—the beginning;



prasrtc‘I—extended; purc‘mi—very old.

TRANSLATION

The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one can
understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with
determination one must cut down this strongly rooted tree with the weapon of
detachment. Thereafter, one must seek that place from which, having gone, one
never returns, and there surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead
from whom everything began and from whom everything has extended since
time immemorial.

PURPORT

It is now clearly stated that the real form of this banyan tree cannot be
understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, the extension of
the real tree is at the other end. When entangled with the material expansions
of the tree, one cannot see how far the tree extends, nor can one see the
beginning of this tree. Yet one has to find out the cause. “I am the son of my
father, my father is the son of such-and-such a person, etc.” By searching in
this way, one comes to Brahma, who is generated by the Garbhodakas’ayi
Visnu. Finally, in this way, when one reaches the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, that is the end of research work. One has to search out that origin of
this tree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the association of
persons who are in knowledge of that Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then
by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this false reflection of
reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connection and actually become
situated in the real tree.

The word ascmga is very important in this connection because the
attachment for sense enjoyment and lording it over the material nature is very
strong. Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion of spiritual science
based on authoritative scriptures, and one must hear from persons who are
actually in knowledge. As a result of such discussion in the association of
devotees, one comes to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then the first



thing one must do is surrender to Him. The description of that place whence
having gone one never returns to this false reﬂected tree is given here. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the original root from whom
everything has emanated. To gain favor of that Personality of Godhead, one
has only to surrender, and this is a result of performing devotional serVice by
hearing, chanting, etc. He is the cause of the extension of the material world.
This has already been explained by the Lord Himself. Aham sarvasya
prabhavah: “I am the origin of everything.” Therefore to get out of the
entanglement of this strong banyan tree of material life, one must surrender to
Krsna. As soon as one surrenders unto Krsna, one becomes detached
automatically from this material extension.

TEXT 5

WWWWN
ﬁﬁwzmzaﬁ—W:Wﬁu a ll

nirmc‘ma-mohc‘t jita—sahga—dosc‘t
adhyc‘ttma—nityc‘t vinivrtta-kc‘tmc‘th
dvandvair Uimuktc‘th sukha—duhkha—samjﬁair
gacchcmty amﬁdhc‘th padam avyayam tat

SYNONYMS

m'h—without; mc‘ma—false prestige; mohc‘th—and illusion; jita—having
conquered; sahga—of association; dosah—the faults; adhyc'ttma—in spiritual
knowledge; nityc'th—in eternity; Umivrtta—disassociated; kamah—from lust;
dvandvaih—from the dualities; vimuktc‘th—liberated; sukha—duhkha—happiness
and distress; samjﬁaih—named; gacchanti—attain; amﬁdhc‘th—unbewildered;
padam—situation; avyayam—eternal; tat—that.

TRANSLATION
Those who are free from false prestige, illusion and false association, who



understand the eternal, who are done with material lust, who are freed from the
dualities of happiness and distress, and who, unbewildered, know how to
surrender unto the Supreme Person attain to that eternal kingdom.

PURPORT

The surrendering process is described here very nicely. The first
qualification is that one should not be deluded by pride. Because the
conditioned soul is puffed up, thinking himself the lord of material nature, it is
very difficult for him to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One should know by the cultivation of real knowledge that he is not lord of
material nature; the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is
free from delusion caused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender. For
one who is always expecting some honor in this material world, it is not
possible to surrender to the Supreme Person. Pride is due to illusion, for
although one comes here, stays for a brief time and then goes away, he has the
foolish notion that he is the lord of the world. He thus makes all things
complicated, and he is always in trouble. The whole world moves under this
impression. People are considering the land, this earth, to belong to human
society, and they have divided the land under the false impression that they
are the proprietors. One has to get out of this false notion that human society
is the proprietor of this world. When one is freed from such a false notion, he
becomes free from all the false associations caused by familial, social and
national affections. These faulty associations bind one to this material world.
After this stage, one has to develop spiritual knowledge. One has to cultivate
knowledge of what is actually his own and what is actually not his own. And
when one has an understanding of things as they are, he becomes free from all
dual conceptions such as happiness and distress, pleasure and pain. He
becomes full in knowledge; then it is possible for him to surrender to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 6



HWEEITHWHWH
amaﬁaﬁmmﬁmuau

ha tad bhc‘tsayate smyo

ha s’as’c‘mko ha pc‘wakah

yad gatvc‘t ha m'vartante
tad dhdma paramam mama

SYNONYMS

na—not; tat—that; bhc‘tsayate—illuminates; sﬁryah—the sun; na—nor;
s’as’c‘mkah—the moon; na—nor; pc‘wakah—fire, electricity; yat—where;
gatvc‘I—going; na—never; nivartcmte—they come back; tat dhc‘tma—that abode;
paramam—supreme; mama—My.

TRANSLATION

That supreme abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
fire or electricity. Those who reach it never return to this material world.

PURPORT

The spiritual world, the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna—which is known as Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana—is described here.
In the spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine, fire or electricity,
because all the planets are self-luminous. We have only one planet in this
universe, the sun, which is self-luminous, but all the planets in the spiritual sky
are self-luminous. The shining effulgence of all those planets (called
Vaikunthas) constitutes the shining sky known as the brahmajyoti. Actually,
the effulgence is emanating from the planet of Krsna, Goloka Vrndavana. Part
of that shining effulgence is covered by the mahat-tattva, the material world.
Other than this, the major portion of that shining sky is full of spiritual
planets, which are called Vaikunthas, chief of which is Goloka Vrndavana.

As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is in conditional



life, but as soon as he reaches the spiritual sky by cutting through the false,
perverted tree of this material world, he becomes liberated. Then there is no
chance of his coming back here. In his conditional life, the living entity
considers himself to be the lord of this material world, but in his liberated state
he enters into the spiritual kingdom and becomes an associate of the Supreme
Lord. There he enjoys eternal bliss, eternal life, and full knowledge.

One should be captivated by this information. He should desire to transfer
himself to that eternal world and extricate himself from this false reflection of
reality. For one who is too much attached to this material world, it is very
difficult to cut that attachment, but if he takes to Krsna consciousness there is
a chance of gradually becoming detached. One has to associate himself with
devotees, those who are in Krsna consciousness. One should search out a
society dedicated to Krsna consciousness and learn how to discharge
devotional serVice. In this way he can cut off his attachment to the material
world. One cannot become detached from the attraction of the material world
simply by dressing himself in saffron cloth. He must become attached to the
devotional serVice of the Lord. Therefore one should take it very seriously that
devotional serVice as described in the Twelfth Chapter is the only way to get
out of this false representation of the real tree. In Chapter Fourteen the
contamination of all kinds of processes by material nature is described. Only
devotional serVice is described as purely transcendental.

The words paramam mama are very important here. Actually every nook
and corner is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the spiritual world is
paramam, full of siX opulences. The Katha Upam'saa (2.2.15) also confirms that
in the spiritual world there is no need of sunshine, moonshine or stars (ha
tatra smyo bhc‘tti ha candratc‘trakam), for the whole spiritual sky is illuminated
by the internal potency of the Supreme Lord. That supreme abode can be
achieved only by surrender and by no other means.

TEXT 7

WWW:W:I



Wzmﬁamﬁmwﬁrueu

mamaivc‘tms’o jiva—loke

jiva—bhﬁtah sanc‘ttcmah
manah—sasthc‘mindriyc‘mi

prakrti—sthc‘mi karsati

SYNONYMS

mama—My; eva—certainly; ams’ah—fragmental particle; jiva—loke—in the
world of conditional life; jiva-bhﬁtah—the conditioned living entity;
sanc‘ttanah—eternal; manah—with the mind; $a$thani—the six;
indriyc‘mi—senses; prakrti—in material nature; sthc‘mi—situated; karsati—is
struggling hard.

TRANSLATION

The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental parts.
Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the siX senses, which
include the mind.

PURPORT

In this verse the identity of the living being is clearly given. The living
entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord—eternally. It is
not that he assumes individuality in his conditional life and in his liberated
state becomes one with the Supreme Lord. He is eternally fragmented. It is
clearly said, sanatanah. According to the Vedic version, the Supreme Lord
manifests and expands Himself in innumerable expansions, of which the
primary expansions are called Visnu-tattva and the secondary expansions are
called the living entities. In other words, the Visnu-tattva is the personal
expansion, and the living entities are the separated expansions. By His
personal expansion, He is manifested in various forms like Lord Rama,
Nrsimhadeva, Visnumurti and all the predominating Deities in the Vaikuntha



planets. The separated expansions, the living entities, are eternally servitors.
The personal expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
individual identities of the Godhead, are always present. Similarly, the
separated expansions of living entities have their identities. As fragmental
parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, the living entities also have fragmental
portions of His qualities, of which independence is one. Every living entity, as
an individual soul, has his personal individuality and a minute form of
independence. By misuse of that independence one becomes a conditioned
soul, and by proper use of independence he is always liberated. In either case,
he is qualitatively eternal, as the Supreme Lord is. In his liberated state he is
freed from this material condition, and he is under the engagement of
transcendental serVice unto the Lord; in his conditioned life he is dominated
by the material modes of nature, and he forgets the transcendental loving
serVice of the Lord. As a result, he has to struggle very hard to maintain his
existence in the material world.

The living entities, not only human beings and the cats and dogs, but even
the greater controllers of the material world—Brahma, Lord Siva and even
Visnu—are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. They are all eternal, not
temporary manifestations. The word karsati (“struggling” or “grappling hard”)
is very significant. The conditioned soul is bound up, as though shackled by
iron chains. He is bound up by the false ego, and the mind is the chief agent
which is driving him in this material existence. When the mind is in the mode
of goodness, his activities are good; when the mind is in the mode of passion,
his activities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode of ignorance,
he travels in the lower species of life. It is clear, however, in this verse, that the
conditioned soul is covered by the material body, with the mind and the
senses, and when he is liberated this material covering perishes, but his
spiritual body manifests itself in its individual capacity. The following
information is there in the Mddhyandim‘tyana—s’mti: sa U67 esa brahma—nistha
idam s’ariram martyam atisrjya brahmc‘tbhisampadya brahmanc‘t pas’yati brahmanc‘t
s’moti brahmanaivedam sarvam anubhavati. It is stated here that when a living
entity gives up this material embodiment and enters into the spiritual world,
he revives his spiritual body, and in his spiritual body he can see the Supreme



Personality of Godhead face to face. He can hear and speak to Him face to
face, and he can understand the Supreme Personality as He is. From smrti also
it is understood, vascmti yatra purusah sarve vaikuntha—mmtayah: in the
spiritual planets everyone lives in bodies featured like the Supreme Personality
of Godhead’s. As far as bodily construction is concerned, there is no difference
between the part-and-parcel living entities and the expansions of Visnu-mmti.
In other words, at liberation the living entity gets a spiritual body by the grace
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The words mamaivc‘tms’ah (“fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme
Lord”) are also very significant. The fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is
not like some material broken part. We have already understood in the Second
Chapter that the spirit cannot be cut into pieces. This fragment is not
materially conceived. It is not like matter, which can be cut into pieces and
joined together again. That conception is not applicable here, because the
Sanskrit word sanc‘ttcma (“eternal”) is used. The fragmental portion is eternal.
It is also stated in the beginning of the Second Chapter that in each and every
individual body the fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is present (dehino
’smin yathc't dehe). That fragmental portion, when liberated from the bodily
entanglement, revives its original spiritual body in the spiritual sky in a
spiritual planet and enjoys association with the Supreme Lord. It is, however,
understood here that the living entity, being the fragmental part and parcel of
the Supreme Lord, is qualitatively one with the Lord, just as the parts and
parcels of gold are also gold.

TEXT 8

WWWHEWH
WWWIWII

s’ariram yad avc‘tpnoti
yac cc‘tpy utkrc‘tmatis’varah
grhitvaitc‘mi samyc‘tti
vc‘tym gandhc‘m ivc‘ts’ayc‘tt



SYNONYMS

s’ariram—the body; yat—as; avdpnoti—gets; yat—as; ca api—also;
utkrc‘tmati—gives up; is’varah—the lord of the body; grhitvc‘I—taking; etc‘mi—all
these; samyc‘tti—goes away; vc‘tyuh—the air; gandhc‘m—smells; iva—like;
c'ts’ayc'tt—from their source.

TRANSLATION

The living entity in the material world carries his different conceptions of
life from one body to another as the air carries aromas. Thus he takes one kind
of body and again quits it to take another.

PURPORT

Here the living entity is described as is’vam, the controller of his own body.
If he likes, he can change his body to a higher grade, and if he likes he can
move to a lower class. Minute independence is there. The change his body
undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death, the consciousness he has
created will carry him on to the next type of body. If he has made his
consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he is sure to change to a cat’s or dog’s
body. And if he has fixed his consciousness on godly qualities, he will change
into the form of a demigod. And if he is in Krsna consciousness, he will be
transferred to Krsnaloka in the spiritual world and will associate with Krsna. It
is a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything is finished.
The individual soul is transmigrating from one body to another, and his
present body and present activities are the background of his next body. One
gets a different body according to karma, and he has to quit this body in due
course. It is stated here that the subtle body, which carries the conception of
the next body, develops another body in the next life. This process of
transmigrating from one body to another and struggling while in the body is
called karsati, or struggle for existence.



TEXT 9
eﬁaagzmﬁamwwﬁaal
Wmmﬁwaqﬁaﬁusu

s’rotram caksuh spars’anam ca
rasanam ghrc‘mam eva ca
adhisthc‘tya mamas” cc‘tyam
visayc‘m upasevate

SYNONYMS

s’rotram—ears; caksuh—eyes; spars’anam—touch; ca—also; rasanam—tongue;
ghrc‘mam—smelling power; eva—also; ca—and; adhisthc‘tya—being situated in;
manah—mind; ca—also; ayam—he; Visayan—sense objects;
upasevate—enjoys.

TRANSLATION

The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain type of
ear, eye, tongue, nose and sense of touch, which are grouped about the mind.
He thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.

PURPORT

In other words, if the living entity adulterates his consciousness with the
qualities of cats and dogs, in his next life he gets a cat or dog body and enjoys.
Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But if we miX water with a certain
color, it changes. Similarly, consciousness is pure, for the spirit soul is pure. But
consciousness is changed according to the association of the material qualities.
Real consciousness is Krsna consciousness. When, therefore, one is situated in
Krsna consciousness, he is in his pure life. But if his consciousness is
adulterated by some type of material mentality, in the next life he gets a
corresponding body. He does not necessarily get a human body again; he can



get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod or one of many other forms, for there
are 8,400,000 species.

TEXT 10

WWWﬁWﬁIWI
WWWWWQWIWII

utkrc‘tmantam sthitam Udpi
bhuﬁjc‘mam U67 gunc‘mvitam
vimﬁdhc‘t nc‘mupas’yanti
pas’ycmti jﬁc‘ma—caksusah

SYNONYMS

utkrc‘tmantam—quitting the body; sthitam—situated in the body; U67
api—either; bhuﬁjc‘mam—enjoying; vc‘I—or; guna—anvitam—under the spell of
the modes of material nature; Uimﬁdhc'th—foolish persons; na—never;
anupas’yanti—can see; pas’yanti—can see; jﬁc‘ma—caksusah—those who have the
eyes of knowledge.

TRANSLATION

The foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body, nor can
they understand what sort of body he enjoys under the spell of the modes of
nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge can see all this.

PURPORT

The word jﬁc‘ma-caksusah is very significant. Without knowledge, one
cannot understand how a living entity leaves his present body, nor what form
of body he is going to take in the next life, nor even why he is living in a
particular type of body. This requires a great amount of knowledge understood
from Bhagavad-gitc‘t and similar literatures heard from a bona fide spiritual



master. One who is trained to perceive all these things is fortunate. Every
living entity is quitting his body under certain circumstances, he is living
under certain circumstances, and he is enjoying under certain circumstances
under the spell of material nature. As a result, he is suffering different kinds of
happiness and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment. Persons who are
everlastingly fooled by lust and desire lose all power to understand their
change of body and their stay in a particular body. They cannot comprehend
it. Those who have developed spiritual knowledge, however, can see that the
spirit is different from the body and is changing its body and enjoying in
different ways. A person in such knowledge can understand how the
conditioned living entity is suffering in this material existence. Therefore
those who are highly developed in Krsna consciousness try their best to give
this knowledge to the people in general, for their conditional life is very much
troublesome. They should come out of it and be Krsna conscious and liberate
themselves to transfer to the spiritual world.

TEXT 11

Watﬁﬁﬁﬁmwﬁum
WSW 3=I WEIR: II 99 II

yatcmto yoginas’ cainam
pas’ycmty c‘ttmcmy avasthitam
yatcmto ’py akrtc‘ttmc‘mo
nainam pas’yanty acetasah

SYNONYMS

yatcmtah—endeavoring; yogmah—transcendentalists; ca—also; enam—this;
pas’yanti—can see; c‘ttmcmi—in the self; avasthitam—situated;
yatcmtah—endeavoring; api—although; akrta—c‘ttmc‘mah—those without
self-realization; na—do not; enam—this; pas’yanti—see; acetasah—having
undeveloped minds.



TRANSLATION

The endeavoring transcendentalists, who are situated in self-realization, can
see all this clearly. But those whose minds are not developed and who are not
situated in self-realization cannot see what is taking place, though they may try
to.

PURPORT

There are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-realization,
but one who is not situated in self-realization cannot see how things are
changing in the body of the living entity. The word yoginah is significant in
this connection. In the present day there are many so-called yogis, and there
are many so-called associations of yogis, but they are actually blind in the
matter of self-realization. They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic
exercise and are satisfied if the body is well built and healthy. They have no
other information. They are called yatcmto ’py akrtc‘ttmc‘mah. Even though they
are endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized. Such
people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the soul. Only
those who are actually in the yoga system and have realized the self, the world,
and the Supreme Lord—in other words, the bhakti-yogis, those engaged in
pure devotional serVice in Krsna consciousness—can understand how things
are taking place.

TEXT 12

Wﬁmsﬁaml
Wainﬂeﬁsﬁﬁrﬁmmunu

yad c‘tditya-gatam tejo
jagad bhc‘tsayate ’khilam
yac candramasi yac cc‘tgnau
tat tejo viddhi mc‘tmakam



SYNONYMS

yat—that which; c‘tditya—gatam—in the sunshine; tejah—splendor; jagat—the
whole world; bhc‘tsayate—illuminates; akhilam—entirely; yat—that which;
candramasi—in the moon; yat—that which; ca—also; agnau—in fire;
tat—that; tejah—splendor; Uiddhi—understand; mc‘tmakam—from Me.

TRANSLATION

The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole world,
comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor of fire are also
from Me.

PURPORT

The unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place. But one
can begin to be established in knowledge by understanding what the Lord
explains here. Everyone sees the sun, moon, fire and electricity. One should
simply try to understand that the splendor of the sun, the splendor of the
moon, and the splendor of electricity or fire are coming from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In such a conception of life, the beginning of Krsna
consciousness, lies a great deal of advancement for the conditioned soul in this
material world. The living entities are essentially the parts and parcels of the
Supreme Lord, and He is giving herewith the hint how they can come back to
Godhead, back to home.

From this verse we can understand that the sun is illuminating the whole
solar system. There are different universes and solar systems, and there are
different suns, moons and planets also, but in each universe there is only one
sun. As stated in Bbagavad—gita (10.21), the moon is one of the stars
(naksatrc‘mc‘tm aham s’as’i). Sunlight is due to the spiritual effulgence in the
spiritual sky of the Supreme Lord. With the rise of the sun, the activities of
human beings are set up. They set fire to prepare their foodstuff, they set fire
to start the factories, etc. So many things are done with the help of fire.



Therefore sunrise, fire and moonlight are so pleasing to the living entities.
Without their help no living entity can live. So if one can understand that the
light and splendor of the sun, moon and fire are emanating from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, then one’s Krsna consciousness will begin. By
the moonshine, all the vegetables are nourished. The moonshine is so pleasing
that people can easily understand that they are living by the mercy of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Without His mercy there cannot be
sun, without His mercy there cannot be moon, and without His mercy there
cannot be fire, and without the help of sun, moon and fire, no one can live.
These are some thoughts to provoke Krsna consciousness in the conditioned
soul.

TEXT 13

WHWWI
WW:HE§EWIWW1H93H

gc‘tm c‘wis’ya ca thZtc‘mi

dhc‘trayc‘tmy aham ojasd
pusnc‘tmi causadhih sarvc‘th
somo thZtvc‘t rasc‘ttmakah

SYNONYMS

gc‘tm—the planets; c'wis’ya—entering; ca—also; thZtc'mi—the living entities;
dhc‘trayc‘tmi—sustain; aham—I; ojasc‘I—by My energy; pusnc‘tmi—am nourishing;
ca—and; ausadhih—vegetables; sarvc‘th—all; somah—the moon;
bhﬁtvd—becoming; rasa—c‘ttmakah—supplying the juice.

TRANSLATION

I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become the
moon and thereby supply the juice of life to all vegetables.



PURPORT

It is understood that all the planets are ﬂoating in the air only by the
energy of the Lord. The Lord enters into every atom, every planet, and every
living being. That is discussed in the Bmhma-samhitc't. It is said there that one
plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramatma, enters
into the planets, the universe, the living entity, and even into the atom. 80
due to His entrance, everything is appropriately manifested. When the spirit
soul is there, a living man can ﬂoat on the water, but when the living spark is
out of the body and the body is dead, the body sinks. Of course when it is
decomposed it ﬂoats just like straw and other things, but as soon as the man is
dead, he at once sinks in the water. Similarly, all these planets are floating in
space, and this is due to the entrance of the supreme energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. His energy is sustaining each planet, just like a
handful of dust. If someone holds a handful of dust, there is no possibility of
the dust’s falling, but if one throws it in the air it will fall down. Similarly,
these planets, which are ﬂoating in the air, are actually held in the fist of the
universal form of the Supreme Lord. By His strength and energy, all moving
and nonmoving things stay in their place. It is said in the Vedic hymns that
because of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the sun is shining and the
planets are steadily moving. Were it not for Him, all the planets would scatter,
like dust in air, and perish. Similarly, it is due to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead that the moon nourishes all vegetables. Due to the moon’s influence,
the vegetables become delicious. Without the moonshine, the vegetables can
neither grow nor taste succulent. Human society is working, living comfortably
and enjoying food due to the supply from the Supreme Lord. Otherwise,
mankind could not survive. The word msc‘ttmakah is very significant.
Everything becomes palatable by the agency of the Supreme Lord through the
inﬂuence of the moon.

TEXT 14



313391mesz
Wzﬁmﬁﬁﬁuﬁuwu

aham vais’vc‘maro thZtvc‘t

prc‘mim‘tm deham c‘ts’ritah

prc‘mc‘tpc‘ma—samc‘tyuktah
pacc‘tmy annam catur—vidham

SYNONYMS

aham—I; vais’vc‘marah—My plenary portion as the digesting fire;
bhﬁtvd—becoming; prc‘minc‘tm—of all living entities; deham—in the bodies;
c'ts’ritah—situated; prc‘ma—the outgoing air; apc'ma—the down-going air;
samayuktah—keeping in balance; pacc‘tmi—I digest; annam—foodstuff;
catuh-vidham—the four kinds.

TRANSLATION

I am the fire of digestion in the bodies of all living entities, and I join with
the air of life, outgoing and incoming, to digest the four kinds of foodstuff.

PURPORT

According to Ayur-vedic s’c'tstm, we understand that there is a fire in the
stomach which digests all food sent there. When the fire is not blazing there is
no hunger, and when the fire is in order we become hungry. Sometimes when
the fire is not going nicely, treatment is required. In any case, this fire is
representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vedic mantras
(Brbad—érarzyaka Upam'saa 5.9.1) also confirm that the Supreme Lord or
Brahman is situated in the form of fire within the stomach and is digesting all
kinds of foodstuff (ayam agm'r vais’vc‘maro yo ’yam antah puruse yenedam annam
pacyate). Therefore since He is helping the digestion of all kinds of foodstuff,
the living entity is not independent in the eating process. Unless the Supreme
Lord helps him in digesting, there is no possibility of eating. He thus produces



and digests foodstuff, and by His grace we are enjoying life. In the
Vedanta-sﬁtra (1.2.27) this is also confirmed. Sabdadibhyo ’ntah pratisthc‘mc‘tc ca:
the Lord is situated within sound and within the body, within the air and even
within the stomach as the digestive force. There are four kinds of
foodstuff—some are swallowed, some are chewed, some are licked up, and some
are sucked—and He is the digestive force for all of them.

TEXT 15

aﬁmaﬁgﬁaﬁﬁﬁmzaﬁaﬁnﬁaﬁm
ﬁaaﬁﬁaﬁaaﬁtaﬁlrﬁﬁﬁﬁaﬁmuwu

sarvasya cc‘tham hrdi scmm'visto
mattah smrtir jﬁc‘mam apohanam ca

vedais’ ca sarvair aham eva vedyo

vedimta—krd veda—vid eva cc‘tham

SYNONYMS

sarvasya—of all living beings; ca—and; aham—I; thi—in the heart;
sannivistah—situated; mattah—from Me; smrtih—remembrance;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; apohanam—forgetfulness; ca—and; vedaih—by the
Vedas; ca—also; sarvaih—all; aham—I am; eva—certainly; vedyah—knowable;
vedimta—krt—the compiler of the Vedanta; veda—vit—the knower of the Vedas;
eva—certainly; ca—and; aham—I.

TRANSLATION

I am seated in everyone’s heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge
and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas, I am to be known. Indeed, I am the
compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.

PURPORT



The Supreme Lord is situated as Paramatma in everyone’s heart, and it is
from Him that all activities are initiated. The living entity forgets everything
of his past life, but he has to act according to the direction of the Supreme
Lord, who is witness to all his work. Therefore he begins his work according to
his past deeds. Required knowledge is supplied to him, and remembrance is
given to him, and he forgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only
all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart. He awards the
different fruitive results. He is worshipable not only as the impersonal
Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the localized Paramatma,
but as the form of the incarnation of the Vedas as well. The Vedas give the
right direction to people so that they can properly mold their lives and come
back to Godhead, back to home. The Vedas offer knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and Krsna in His incarnation as Vyasadeva is
the compiler of the Vedimta—sﬁtra. The commentation on the Vedc‘mta-sﬁtra by
Vyasadeva in the Srimad-Bhagavatam gives the real understanding of
Vedc'mta-sﬁtm. The Supreme Lord is so full that for the deliverance of the
conditioned soul He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of his
activity, and the giver of knowledge in the form of Vedas and as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, the teacher of the Bhagavad-gitc‘t. He is
worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good; God is all-merciful.

Antah—pravistah §67$t67 janc‘mc‘tm. The living entity forgets as soon as he quits
his present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by the Supreme Lord.
Although he forgets, the Lord gives him the intelligence to renew his work
where he ended his last life. So not only does a living entity enjoy or suffer in
this world according to the dictation from the Supreme Lord situated locally in
the heart, but he receives the opportunity to understand the Vedas from Him.
If one is serious about understanding the Vedic knowledge, then Krsna gives
the required intelligence. Why does He present the Vedic knowledge for
understanding.7 Because a living entity individually needs to understand
Krsna. Vedic literature confirms this: yo ’sau sarvair vedair giyate. In all Vedic
literature, beginning from the four Vedas, Vedc‘mta—sﬁtra and the Upcmisads
and Purc‘mas, the glories of the Supreme Lord are celebrated. By performance
of Vedic rituals, discussion of the Vedic philosophy and worship of the Lord in



devotional serVice, He is attained. Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to
understand Krsna. The Vedas give us direction by which to understand Krsna
and the process of realizing Him. The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Vedanta-sﬁtra (1.1.4) confirms this in the following words: tat tu
samanvayc‘tt. One can attain perfection in three stages. By understanding
Vedic literature one can understand his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by performing the different processes one can
approach Him, and at the end one can attain the supreme goal, who is no
other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse the purpose of
the Vedas, the understanding of the Vedas, and the goal of the Vedas are
clearly defined.

TEXT 16

WWEQ$W8TRQHHI
mzaafﬁnﬁﬁwsazmﬁumu

dvc‘w imau purusau loke
ksaras’ cc‘tksara eva ca
ksarah sarvc‘mi thZtc‘mi
kIZttt—stho ’ksara ucyate

SYNONYMS

dvau—two; imau—these; purusau—living entities; loke—in the world;
ksarah—fallible; ca—and; aksarah—infallible; eva—certainly; ca—and;
ksarah—fallible; sarvc‘mi—all; thZtc‘mi—living entities; kIZttI—sthah—in
oneness; aksarah—infallible; ucyate—is said.

TRANSLATION

There are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In the material
world every living entity is fallible, and in the spiritual world every living entity

is called infallible.



PURPORT

As already explained, the Lord in His incarnation as Vyasadeva compiled
the Vedc'mta-sﬁtm. Here the Lord is giving, in summary, the contents of the
Vedc'mta-sﬁtm. He says that the living entities, who are innumerable, can be
divided into two classes—the fallible and the infallible. The living entities are
eternally separated parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When they are in contact with the material world they are called jiva-bhﬁta,
and the Sanskrit words given here, ksarah sarvc‘mi thZtc'mi, mean that they are
fallible. Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
however, are called infallible. Oneness does not mean that they have no
individuality, but that there is no disunity. They are all agreeable to the
purpose of the creation. Of course, in the spiritual world there is no such thing
as creation, but since the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as stated in the
Vedc'mta-sﬁtm, is the source of all emanations, that conception is explained.

According to the statement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Krsna, there are two classes of living entities. The Vedas give evidence of this,
so there is no doubt about it. The living entities who are struggling in this
world with the mind and five senses have their material bodies, which are
changing. As long as a living entity is conditioned, his body changes due to
contact with matter; matter is changing, so the living entity appears to be
changing. But in the spiritual world the body is not made of matter; therefore
there is no change. In the material world the living entity undergoes siX
changes—birth, growth, duration, reproduction, then dwindling and
vanishing. These are the changes of the material body. But in the spiritual
world the body does not change; there is no old age, there is no birth, there is
no death. There all exists in oneness. Ksarah sarvc‘mi thZtc'mi: any living entity
who has come in contact with matter, beginning from the first created being,
Brahma, down to a small ant, is changing its body; therefore they are all
fallible. In the spiritual world, however, they are always liberated in oneness.

TEXT 17



W:W:WW:I
EIIWWE‘WHINII

uttamah purusas tv anyah
parame‘ttmety udc‘thrtah
yo loka—trayam c‘wis’ya
bibharty avyaya is’varah

SYNONYMS

uttamah—the best; purusah—personality; tu—but; anyah—another;
parama—the supreme; c‘ttmc‘t—self; iti—thus; udc‘thrtah—is said; yah—who;
loka—of the universe; trayam—the three divisions; c‘wis’ya—entering;
bibharti—is maintaining; avyayah—inexhaustible; is’varah—the Lord.

TRANSLATION

Besides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Supreme Soul,
the imperishable Lord Himself, who has entered the three worlds and is
maintaining them.

PURPORT

The idea of this verse is very nicely expressed in the Katha Upanisad
(2.2.13) and gvetésVatara Upanisaa (6.13). It is clearly stated there that above
the innumerable living entities, some of whom are conditioned and some of
whom are liberated, there is the Supreme Personality, who is Paramatma. The
Upanisadic verse runs as follows: nityo nityc‘mc‘tm cetcmas’ cetam‘mc‘tm. The
purport is that amongst all the living entities, both conditioned and liberated,
there is one supreme living personality, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who maintains them and gives them all the facility of enjoyment according to
different work. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in everyone’s
heart as Paramatma. A wise man who can understand Him is eligible to at in
perfect peace, not others.



TEXT 18

ammeﬁa‘rssnmaﬁ ﬁlm: I
388%Eﬁﬁaé‘aqfaa: 118%: || 9= II

yasmc‘tt ksaram atito ’ham
aksarc‘td api cottamah
ato ’smi loke vede ca
prathitah purusottamah

SYNONYMS

yasmc‘It—because; ksaram—to the fallible; atitah—transcendental; aham—I
am; aksarc‘It—beyond the infallible; api—also; ca—and; uttamah—the best;
atah—therefore; asmi—I am; loke—in the world; vede—in the Vedic
literature; ca—and; prathitah—celebrated; purusa-uttamah—as the Supreme
Personality.

TRANSLATION

Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the infallible, and
because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the world and in the Vedas as
that Supreme Person.

PURPORT

No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna—neither
the conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is therefore the greatest of
personalities. Now it is clear here that the living entities and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are individuals. The difference is that the living
entities, either in the conditioned state or in the liberated state, cannot
surpass in quantity the inconceivable potencies of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities



as being on the same level or equal in all respects. There is always the question
of superiority and inferiority between their personalities. The word uttama is
very significant. No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The word loke signifies “in the pamusa dgama (the smrti scriptures).” As
confirmed in the Nirukti dictionary, lokyate veda‘trtho ’nena: “The purpose of
the Vedas is explained by the smrti scriptures.”

The Supreme Lord, in His localized aspect of Paramatma, is also described
in the Vedas themselves. The following verse appears in the Vedas (Cbéndogya
Upam'saa 8.12.3): tc‘wad esa samprasc‘tdo ’smc‘tc charirat samutthc‘tya param
jyoti—rﬁpam sampadya svena rﬂpenc‘tbhinispadyate sa uttamah purusah. “The
Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal brahmajyoti; then in
His form He remains in His spiritual identity. That Supreme is called the
Supreme Personality.” This means that the Supreme Personality is exhibiting
and diffusing His spiritual effulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That
Supreme Personality also has a localized aspect as Paramatma. By incarnating
Himself as the son of Satyavati and Paras’ara, He explains the Vedic knowledge
as Vyasadeva.

TEXT 19

a‘rmﬁanauﬁ‘rmﬁrgeml
Haafﬁgaﬁniaéﬂaﬁamuwu

yo mam evam asammﬁdho
jc‘mc‘tti purusottamam

sa sarva-vid bhajati mam
sarva-bhdvena bhc‘trata

SYNONYMS

yah—anyone who; mc‘tm—Me; evam—thus; asammﬁdhah—without a doubt;
jc‘mc‘tti—knows; purusa—uttamam—the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
sah—he; sarva-Uit—the knower of everything; bhajati—renders devotional



service; mc‘tm—unto Me; sarva-bhc‘wena—in all respects; bhc‘trata—O son of
Bharata.

TRANSLATION

Whoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without
doubting, is the knower of everything. He therefore engages himself in full
devotional service to Me, 0 son of Bharata.

PURPORT

There are many philosophical speculations about the constitutional
position of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Now in this
verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains that anyone who
knows Lord Krsna to be the Supreme Person is actually the knower of
everything. The imperfect knower goes on simply speculating about the
Absolute Truth, but the perfect knower, without wasting his valuable time,
engages directly in Krsna consciousness, the devotional serVice of the Supreme
Lord. Throughout the whole of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, this fact is being stressed at
every step. And still there are so many stubborn commentators on
Bhagavad-gitc‘t who consider the Supreme Absolute Truth and the living
entities to be one and the same.

Vedic knowledge is called s’mti, learning by aural reception. One should
actually receive the Vedic message from authorities like Krsna and His
representatives. Here Krsna distinguishes everything very nicely, and one
should hear from this source. Simply to hear like the hogs is not sufficient; one
must be able to understand from the authorities. It is not that one should
simply speculate academically. One should submissively hear from
Bhagavad-gitc‘t that these living entities are always subordinate to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Anyone who is able to understand this, according to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, knows the purpose of the
Vedas; no one else knows the purpose of the Vedas.

The word bhajati is very significant. In many places the word bhajati is
expressed in relationship with the serVice of the Supreme Lord. If a person is



engaged in full Krsna consciousness, in the devotional serVice of the Lord, it is
to be understood that he has understood all the Vedic knowledge. In the
Vaisnava parampara it is said that if one is engaged in the devotional serVice of
Krsna, then there is no need for any other spiritual process for understanding
the Supreme Absolute Truth. He has already come to the point, because he is
engaged in the devotional serVice of the Lord. He has ended all preliminary
processes of understanding. But if anyone, after speculating for hundreds of
thousands of lives, does not come to the point that Krsna is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and that one has to surrender there, all his speculation
for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time.

TEXT 20

'91?! 'SIIHWWI
mammaamuwu

iti guhyatamam s’c‘tstram
idam uktam mayanagha
etad buddhvc‘t buddhimc‘m syc‘tt
krta—krtyas’ ca bhc‘trata

SYNONYMS

iti—thus; guhya—tamam—the most confidential; s’c‘tstram—revealed scripture;
idam—this; uktam—disclosed; maya—by Me; anagha—O sinless one;
etat—this; buddhvc‘t—understanding; buddhi—mc‘m—intelligent; sydt—one
becomes; krta-krtyah—the most perfect in his endeavors; ca—and;
bhc‘tmta—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless one, and
it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this will become wise, and his
endeavors will know perfection.



PURPORT

The Lord clearly explains here that this is the substance of all revealed
scriptures. And one should understand this as it is given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Thus one will become intelligent and perfect in
transcendental knowledge. In other words, by understanding this philosophy
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engaging in His transcendental
serVice, everyone can become freed from all contaminations of the modes of
material nature. Devotional serVice is a process of spiritual understanding.
Wherever devotional serVice exists, the material contamination cannot
coexist. Devotional serVice to the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the
same because they are spiritual; devotional serVice takes place within the
internal energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is said to be the sun, and
ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is present, there is no question of
darkness. Therefore, whenever devotional serVice is present under the proper
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, there is no question of ignorance.

Everyone must take to this consciousness of Krsna and engage in devotional
serVice to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comes to this position of
understanding Krsna and engages in devotional serVice, however intelligent he
may be in the estimation of some common man, he is not perfectly intelligent.

The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha, “O
sinless one,” means that unless one is free from all sinful reactions it is very
difficult to understand Krsna. One has to become free from all contamination,
all sinful activities; then he can understand. But devotional serVice is so pure
and potent that once one is engaged in devotional serVice he automatically
comes to the stage of sinlessness.

While one is performing devotional serVice in the association of pure
devotees in full Krsna consciousness, there are certain things which require to
be vanquished altogether. The most important thing one has to surmount is
weakness of the heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire to lord it over
material nature. Thus one gives up the transcendental loving serVice of the
Supreme Lord. The second weakness of the heart is that as one increases the
propensity to lord it over material nature, he becomes attached to matter and



the possession of matter. The problems of material existence are due to these
weaknesses of the heart. In this chapter the first five verses describe the
process of freeing oneself from these weaknesses of heart, and the rest of the
chapter, from the sixth verse through the end, discusses purusottama-yoga.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the F ifteenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Purusottama—yoga, the Yoga of the Supreme
Person.

 

The Divine And Demoniac Natures

magmaamaﬁatrmu
WWW:le

WWWWIIQII
ﬁazmqﬁzﬁﬁmﬁmﬁmﬁml
I47=r[—%I1=I=naféaI'ItrfEIEIIEIFaIHRHII9n

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
abhayam sattUa—sams’uddhir
jﬁc‘ma-yoga-vyavasthitih
dc‘mam damas’ ca yajﬁas’ ca



svc‘tdhyc‘tyas tapa c‘trjavam

ahimsc‘t satyam akrodhas
tyc‘tgah s’c‘mtir apais’unam
dayc‘t bhﬁtesv aloluptvam
mc‘trdavam hrir acc‘tpalam

tejah ksamc‘t dhrtih s’aucam
adroho nc‘tti—mc‘mitc‘t

bhavanti sampadam daivim
abhijc‘ttasya bhc‘trata

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
abhayam—fearlessness; sattva-sams’uddhih—purification of one’s existence;
jﬁc‘ma—in knowledge; yoga—of linking up; vyavasthitih—the situation;
dc‘mam—charity; damah—controlling the mind; ca—and;
yajﬁah—performance of sacrifice; ca—and; svc‘tdhyc‘tyah—study of Vedic
literature; tapah—austerity; c'trjavam—simplicity; ahimsc't—nonviolence;
satyam—truthfulness; akrodhah—freedom from anger; tyc‘tgah—renunciation;
s’c‘mtih—tranquillity; apais’unam—aversion to fault-finding; dayc't—mercy;
bhﬁtesu—towards all living entities; aloluptvam—freedom from greed;
mc‘trdavam—gentleness; hrih—modesty; acc‘tpalam—determination;
tejah—Vigor; ksamc‘I—forgiveness; dhrtih—fortitude; s’aucam—cleanliness;
adrohah—freedom from envy; na—not; ati-mc'mitc't—expectation of honor;
bhavcmti—are; sampadam—the qualities; daivim—the transcendental nature;
abhijc‘ttasya—of one who is born of; bhc‘trata—O son of Bharata.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Fearlessness; purification of
one’s existence; cultivation of spiritual knowledge; charity; self-control;
performance of sacrifice; study of the Vedas; austerity; simplicity; nonviolence;
truthfulness; freedom from anger; renunciation; tranquillity; aversion to



faultfinding; compassion for all living entities; freedom from covetousness;
gentleness; modesty; steady determination; Vigor; forgiveness; fortitude;
cleanliness; and freedom from envy and from the passion for honor—these
transcendental qualities, 0 son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with
divine nature.

PURPORT

In the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this material
world was explained. The extra roots coming out of it were compared to the
activities of the living entities, some auspicious, some inauspicious. In the
Ninth Chapter, also, the devas, or godly, and the asuras, the ungodly, or
demons, were explained. Now, according to Vedic rites, activities in the mode
of goodness are considered auspicious for progress on the path of liberation,
and such activities are known as daivi prakrti, transcendental by nature. Those
who are situated in the transcendental nature make progress on the path of
liberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion and ignorance, on
the other hand, there is no possibility of liberation. Either they will have to
remain in this material world as human beings, or they will descend among the
species of animals or even lower life forms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord
explains both the transcendental nature and its attendant qualities and the
demoniac nature and its qualities. He also explains the advantages and
disadvantages of these qualities.

The word abhijc'ttasya in reference to one born of transcendental qualities
or godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child in a godly atmosphere
is known in the Vedic scriptures as Garbhadhana-samskara. If the parents
want a child in the godly qualities they should follow the ten principles
recommended for the social life of the human being. In Bhagavad-gitc‘t we have
studied also before that sex life for begetting a good child is Krsna Himself. Sex
life is not condemned, provided the process is used in Krsna consciousness.
Those who are in Krsna consciousness at least should not beget children like
cats and dogs but should beget them so that they may become Krsna conscious
after birth. That should be the advantage of children born of a father and



mother absorbed in Krsna consciousness.

The social institution known as vamc‘ts’rama—dharma—the institution
dividing society into four divisions of social life and four occupational
divisions or castes—is not meant to divide human society according to birth.
Such divisions are in terms of educational qualifications. They are to keep the
society in a state of peace and prosperity. The qualities mentioned herein are
explained as transcendental qualities meant for making a person progress in
spiritual understanding so that he can get liberated from the material world.

In the vamc‘ts’rama institution the sannydsi, or the person in the renounced
order of life, is considered to be the head or the spiritual master of all the social
statuses and orders. A brc‘thmana is considered to be the spiritual master of the
three other sections of a society, namely, the ksatriyas, the vais’yas and the
S’Ildras, but a scmnyc'tsi, who is on the top of the institution, is considered to be
the spiritual master of the brc‘thmanas also. For a scmnyc‘tsi, the first
qualification should be fearlessness. Because a sannyc'tsi has to be alone without
any support or guarantee of support, he has simply to depend on the mercy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If one thinks, “After I leave my
connections, who will protect me?” he should not accept the renounced order
of life. One must be fully convinced that Krsna or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in His localized aspect as Paramatma is always within, that He is
seeing everything and He always knows what one intends to do. One must thus
have firm conviction that Krsna as Paramatma will take care of a soul
surrendered to Him. “I shall never be alone,” one should think. “Even if I live
in the darkest regions of a forest I shall be accompanied by Krsna, and He will
give me all protection.” That conviction is called abhayam, fearlessness. This
state of mind is necessary for a person in the renounced order of life.

Then he has to purify his existence. There are so many rules and
regulations to be followed in the renounced order of life. Most important of all,
a scmnyc'tsi is strictly forbidden to have any intimate relationship with a
woman. He is even forbidden to talk with a woman in a secluded place. Lord
Caitanya was an ideal samtyc'tsi, and when He was at Puri His feminine
devotees could not even come near to offer their respects. They were advised
to bow down from a distant place. This is not a sign of hatred for women as a



class, but it is a stricture imposed on the scmnyc'tsi not to have close
connections with women. One has to follow the rules and regulations of a
particular status of life in order to purify his existence. For a sannyc'tsi, intimate
relations with women and possession of wealth for sense gratification are
strictly forbidden. The ideal scmnyc'tsi was Lord Caitanya Himself, and we can
learn from His life that He was very strict in regards to women. Although He is
considered to be the most liberal incarnation of Godhead, accepting the most
fallen conditioned souls, He strictly followed the rules and regulations of the
sannyc'tsa order of life in connection with association with woman. One of His
personal associates, namely Chota Haridasa, was associated with Lord
Caitanya along with His other confidential personal associates, but somehow
or other this Chota Haridasa looked lustily on a young woman, and Lord
Caitanya was so strict that He at once rejected him from the society of His
personal associates. Lord Caitanya said, “For a scmnyc'tsi or anyone who is
aspiring to get out of the clutches of material nature and trying to elevate
himself to the spiritual nature and go back home, back to Godhead, for him,
looking toward material possessions and women for sense gratification—not
even enjoying them, but just looking toward them with such a propensity—is
so condemned that he had better commit suicide before experiencing such
illicit desires.” So these are the processes for purification.

The next item is jﬁc‘ma-yoga-vyavasthiti: being engaged in the cultivation of
knowledge. Sannyc'tsi life is meant for distributing knowledge to the
householders and others who have forgotten their real life of spiritual
advancement. A sannyc'tsi is supposed to beg from door to door for his
livelihood, but this does not mean that he is a beggar. Humility is also one of
the qualifications of a transcendentally situated person, and out of sheer
humility the scmnyc'tsi goes from door to door, not exactly for the purpose of
begging, but to see the householders and awaken them to Krsna consciousness.
This is the duty of a sannyc'tsi. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by his
spiritual master, he should preach Krsna consciousness with logic and
understanding, and if one is not so advanced he should not accept the
renounced order of life. But even if one has accepted the renounced order of
life without sufficient knowledge, he should engage himself fully in hearing



from a bona fide spiritual master to cultivate knowledge. A scmnyc'tsi, or one in
the renounced order of life, must be situated in fearlessness, sattUa-sams’uddhi
(purity) and jﬁc‘ma—yoga (knowledge).

The next item is charity. Charity is meant for the householders. The
householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spend fifty
percent of their income to propagate Krsna consciousness all over the world.
Thus a householder should give in charity to institutional societies that are
engaged in that way. Charity should be given to the right receiver. There are
different kinds of charity, as will be explained later on—charity in the modes
of goodness, passion and ignorance. Charity in the mode of goodness is
recommended by the scriptures, but charity in the modes of passion and
ignorance is not recommended, because it is simply a waste of money. Charity
should be given only to propagate Krsna consciousness all over the world. That
is charity in the mode of goodness.

Then as far as dama (self-control) is concerned, it is not only meant for
other orders of religious society, but is especially meant for the householder.
Although he has a wife, a householder should not use his senses for sex life
unnecessarily. There are restrictions for the householders even in sex life,
which should only be engaged in for the propagation of children. If he does not
require children, he should not enjoy sex life with his wife. Modern society
enjoys sex life with contraceptive methods or more abominable methods to
avoid the responsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental quality,
but is demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to make progress
in spiritual life, he must control his sex life and should not beget a child
without the purpose of serving Krsna. If he is able to beget children who will
be in Krsna consciousness, one can produce hundreds of children, but without
this capacity one should not indulge only for sense pleasure.

Sacrifice is another item to be performed by the householders, because
sacrifices require a large amount of money. Those in other orders of life,
namely brahmacarya, vc‘maprastha and sannyc‘tsa, have no money; they live by
begging. 80 performance of different types of sacrifice is meant for the
householders. They should perform agni-hotm sacrifices as enjoined in the
Vedic literature, but such sacrifices at the present moment are very expensive,



and it is not possible for any householder to perform them. The best sacrifice
recommended in this age is called sahkirtana—yajﬁa. This sahkirtana—yajﬁa, the
chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, is the best and most inexpensive
sacrifice; everyone can adopt it and derive benefit. 80 these three items,
namely charity, sense control and performance of sacrifice, are meant for the
householder.

Then svc‘tdhyc‘tya, Vedic study, is meant for brahmacarya, or student life.
Bmhmacc‘tris should have no connection with women; they should live a life of
celibacy and engage the mind in the study of Vedic literature for cultivation of
spiritual knowledge. This is called svc‘tdhyc'tya.

Tapas, or austerity, is especially meant for the retired life. One should not
remain a householder throughout his whole life; he must always remember that
there are four divisions of life—brahmacarya, grhastha, vc‘maprastha and
scmnyc‘tsa. So after grhastha, householder life, one should retire. If one lives for
a hundred years, he should spend twenty-five years in student life, twenty-five
in householder life, twenty-five in retired life and twenty-five in the
renounced order of life. These are the regulations of the Vedic religious
discipline. A man retired from household life must practice austerities of the
body, mind and tongue. That is tapasya. The entire vamc‘ts’rama—dharma society
is meant for tapasya. Without tapasya, or austerity, no human being can get
liberation. The theory that there is no need of austerity in life, that one can go
on speculating and everything will be nice, is recommended neither in the
Vedic literature nor in Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Such theories are manufactured by
show-bottle spiritualists who are trying to gather more followers. If there are
restrictions, rules and regulations, people will not become attracted. Therefore
those who want followers in the name of religion, just to have a show only,
don’t restrict the lives of their students, nor their own lives. But that method is
not approved by the Vedas.

As far as the brahminical quality of simplicity is concerned, not only should
a particular order of life follow this principle, but every member, be he in the
brahmacc‘tri c‘ts’rama, grhastha c‘ts’rama, vc‘maprastha c‘ts’rama or scmnyc‘tsa c‘ts’rama.
One should be very simple and straightforward.



Ahimsc't means not arresting the progressive life of any living entity. One
should not think that since the spirit spark is never killed even after the
killing of the body there is no harm in killing animals for sense gratification.
People are now addicted to eating animals, in spite of having an ample supply
of grains, fruits and milk. There is no necessity for animal killing. This
injunction is for everyone. When there is no alternative, one may kill an
animal, but it should be offered in sacrifice. At any rate, when there is an
ample food supply for humanity, persons who are desiring to make
advancement in spiritual realization should not commit Violence to animals.
Real ahimsc't means not checking anyone’s progressive life. The animals are also
making progress in their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one category
of animal life to another. If a particular animal is killed, then his progress is
checked. If an animal is staying in a particular body for so many days or so
many years and is untimely killed, then he has to come back again in that form
of life to complete the remaining days in order to be promoted to another
species of life. 80 their progress should not be checked simply to satisfy one’s
palate. This is called ahimsc't.

Satyam. This word means that one should not distort the truth for some
personal interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficult passages, but the
meaning or the purpose should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master.
That is the process for understanding the Vedas. Sruti means that one should
hear from the authority. One should not construe some interpretation for his
personal interest. There are so many commentaries on Bhagavad-gitc‘t that
misinterpret the original text. The real import of the word should be
presented, and that should be learned from a bona fide spiritual master.

Akrodha means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one should be
tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomes polluted. Anger
is a product of the mode of passion and lust, so one who is transcendentally
situated should check himself from anger. Apais’unam means that one should
not find fault with others or correct them unnecessarily. Of course to call a
thief a thief is not faultfinding, but to call an honest person a thief is very
much offensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hri means
that one should be very modest and must not perform some act which is



abominable. Acapalam, determination, means that one should not be agitated
or frustrated in some attempt. There may be failure in some attempt, but one
should not be sorry for that; he should make progress with patience and
determination.

The word tejas used here is meant for the ksatriyas. The ksatriyas should
always be very strong to be able to give protection to the weak. They should
not pose themselves as nonviolent. If Violence is required, they must exhibit it.
But a person who is able to curb down his enemy may under certain conditions
show forgiveness. He may excuse minor offenses.

Saucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one’s dealings
also. It is especially meant for the mercantile people, who should not deal in
the black market. Nc'tti-mc'mitc't, not expecting honor, applies to the S’Ildms, the
worker class, which are considered, according to Vedic injunctions, to be the
lowest of the four classes. They should not be puffed up with unnecessary
prestige or honor and should remain in their own status. It is the duty of the
S’Ildras to offer respect to the higher class for the upkeep of the social order.

All these twenty-siX qualifications mentioned are transcendental qualities.
They should be cultivated according to the different statuses of social and
occupational order. The purport is that even though material conditions are
miserable, if these qualities are developed by practice, by all classes of men,
then gradually it is possible to rise to the highest platform of transcendental
realization.

TEXT 4

@ﬁaﬁsﬁnﬁamzwsqﬁam
aaﬁarfﬁamﬁawmﬁaueu

dambho darpo ’bhimc‘mas’ ca
krodhah pc‘tmsyam eva ca
ajﬁc‘mam cc‘tbhijc‘ttasya
pc‘trtha sampadam c‘tsurim



SYNONYMS

dambhah—pride; darpah—arrogance; abhimc‘mah—conceit; ca—and;
krodhah—anger; pc‘trusyam—harshness; eva—certainly; ca—and;
ajﬁc‘mam—ignorance; ca—and; abhijc‘ttasya—of one who is born of; pc‘trtha—O
son of Prtha; sampadam—the qualities; c‘tsmim—the demoniac nature.

TRANSLATION

Pride, arrogance, conceit, anger, harshness and ignorance—these qualities
belong to those of demoniac nature, 0 son of Prtha.

PURPORT

In this verse, the royal road to hell is described. The demoniac want to
make a show of religion and advancement in spiritual science, although they
do not follow the principles. They are always arrogant or proud in possessing
some type of education or so much wealth. They desire to be worshiped by
others, and demand respectability, although they do not command respect.
Over triﬂes they become very angry and speak harshly, not gently. They do
not know what should be done and what should not be done. They do
everything whimsically, according to their own desire, and they do not
recognize any authority. These demoniac qualities are taken on by them from
the beginning of their bodies in the wombs of their mothers, and as they grow
they manifest all these inauspicious qualities.

TEXT 5

ﬁWwWWI
mﬁazama‘aaﬁqﬁaﬁsﬁrwsauau

daivi sampad vimoksc‘tya
nibandhc‘tyc‘tsuri matd



mc‘t s’ucah sampadam daivim
abhijc‘tto ’si pc‘mdava

SYNONYMS

daiUi—transcendental; sampat—assets; Uimoksc‘tya—meant for liberation;
nibandhc‘tya—for bondage; c'tsmi—demoniac qualities; matc't—are considered;
mc‘t—do not; s’ucah—worry; sampadam—assets; daivim—transcendental;
abhijc‘ttah—born of; asi—you are; pc‘mdava—O son of Pandu.

TRANSLATION

The transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the
demoniac qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, 0 son of Pandu, for you
are born with the divine qualities.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna encouraged Arjuna by telling him that he was not born with
demoniac qualities. His involvement in the fight was not demoniac, because he
was considering the pros and cons. He was considering whether respectable
persons such as Bhisma and Drona should be killed or not, so he was not acting
under the influence of anger, false prestige or harshness. Therefore he was not
of the quality of the demons. For a ksatriya, a military man, shooting arrows at
the enemy is considered transcendental, and refraining from such a duty is
demoniac. Therefore there was no cause for Arjuna to lament. Anyone who
performs the regulative principles of the different orders of life is
transcendentally situated.

TEXT 6

ﬁwﬁmﬁ‘aﬁﬁqﬁaamqam
aﬁmzmwwitmuau



dvau bhﬁta—sargau loke ’smin
daiva c‘tsura eva ca
daivo vistaras’ah prokta
c‘tsuram pc‘trtha me s’mu

SYNONYMS

dvau—two; thZta—sargau—created living beings; loke—in the world;
asmin—this; daivah—godly; c‘tsurah—demoniac; eva—certainly; ca—and;
daivah—the divine; vistaras’ah—at great length; proktah—said; dsuram—the
demoniac; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; me—from Me; s’mu—just hear.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, in this world there are two kinds of created beings. One is
called the divine and the other demoniac. I have already explained to you at
length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of the demoniac.

PURPORT

Lord Krsna, having assured Arjuna that he was born with the divine
qualities, is now describing the demoniac way. The conditioned living entities
are divided into two classes in this world. Those who are born with divine
qualities follow a regulated life; that is to say they abide by the injunctions in
scriptures and by the authorities. One should perform duties in the light of
authoritative scripture. This mentality is called divine. One who does not
follow the regulative principles as they are laid down in the scriptures and who
acts according to his whims is called demoniac or asuric. There is no other
criterion but obedience to the regulative principles of scriptures. It is
mentioned in Vedic literature that both the demigods and the demons are
born of the Prajapati; the only difference is that one class obeys the Vedic
injunctions and the other does not.

TEXT 7



WHWHWHWH
Hﬁﬁmﬁﬁaﬁrﬁsﬁ'éﬁﬁaﬁueu

pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
janc‘t ha vidm c‘tsurc‘th

ha s’aucam m‘tpi cc‘tcc‘tro

ha satyam tesu vidyate

SYNONYMS

pravrttim—acting properly; ca—also; nivrttim—not acting improperly;
ca—and; janc‘Ih—persons; na—never; viduh—know; c‘tsurc‘Ih—of demoniac
quality; na—never; s’aucam—cleanliness; na—nor; api—also; ca—and;
c‘tcc‘trah—behavior; na—never; satyam—truth; tesu—in them; vidyate—there
1s.

TRANSLATION

Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not to
be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is found in them.

PURPORT

In every civilized human society there is some set of scriptural rules and
regulations which is followed from the beginning. Especially among the
Aryans, those who adopt the Vedic civilization and who are known as the most
advanced civilized peoples, those who do not follow the scriptural injunctions
are supposed to be demons. Therefore it is stated here that the demons do not
know the scriptural rules, nor do they have any inclination to follow them.
Most of them do not know them, and even if some of them know, they have
not the tendency to follow them. They have no faith, nor are they willing to
act in terms of the Vedic injunctions. The demons are not clean, either
externally or internally. One should always be careful to keep his body clean



by bathing, brushing teeth, shaving, changing clothes, etc. As far as internal
cleanliness is concerned, one should always remember the holy names of God
and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. The demons neither like nor follow all
these rules for external and internal cleanliness.

As for behavior, there are many rules and regulations guiding human
behavior, such as the Manu-samhitc't, which is the law of the human race. Even
up to today, those who are Hindu follow the Manu-samhitc't. Laws of
inheritance and other legalities are derived from this book. Now, in the
Manu-samhitc't it is clearly stated that a woman should not be given freedom.
That does not mean that women are to be kept as slaves, but they are like
children. Children are not given freedom, but that does not mean that they
are kept as slaves. The demons have now neglected such injunctions, and they
think that women should be given as much freedom as men. However, this has
not improved the social condition of the world. Actually, a woman should be
given protection at every stage of life. She should be given protection by the
father in her younger days, by the husband in her youth, and by the grownup
sons in her old age. This is proper social behavior according to the
Manu-samhitc't. But modern education has artificially devised a puffed-up
concept of womanly life, and therefore marriage is practically now an
imagination in human society. Nor is the moral condition of woman very good
now. The demons, therefore, do not accept any instruction which is good for
society, and because they do not follow the experience of great sages and the
rules and regulations laid down by the sages, the social condition of the
demoniac people is very miserable.

TEXT 8

mﬁsﬁaﬁﬁIEﬁMI
WWW" = II

asatyam apratistham te
jagad c‘thur anis’varam



aparaspara—sambhﬁtam
kim anyat kdma—haitukam

SYNONYMS

asatyam—unreal; apratistham—without foundation; te—they; jagat—the
cosmic manifestation; c'thuh—say; anis’vamm—with no controller;
aparaspara—without cause; sambhﬁtam—arisen; kim anyat—there is no other
cause; kc‘tma—haitukam—it is due to lust only.

TRANSLATION

They say that this world is unreal, with no foundation, no God in control.
They say it is produced of seX desire and has no cause other than lust.

PURPORT

The demonic conclude that the world is phantasmagoria. There is no cause
and effect, no controller, no purpose: everything is unreal. They say that this
cosmic manifestation arises due to chance material actions and reactions. They
do not think that the world was created by God for a certain purpose. They
have their own theory: that the world has come about in its own way and that
there is no reason to believe that there is a God behind it. For them there is no
difference between spirit and matter, and they do not accept the Supreme
Spirit. Everything is matter only, and the whole cosmos is supposed to be a
mass of ignorance. According to them, everything is void, and whatever
manifestation exists is due to our ignorance in perception. They take it for
granted that all manifestation of diversity is a display of ignorance. Just as in a
dream we may create so many things which actually have no existence, so
when we are awake we shall see that everything is simply a dream. But
factually, although the demons say that life is a dream, they are very expert in
enjoying this dream. And so, instead of acquiring knowledge, they become
more and more implicated in their dreamland. They conclude that as a child is
simply the result of sexual intercourse between man and woman, this world is



born without any soul. For them it is only a combination of matter that has
produced the living entities, and there is no question of the existence of the
soul. As many living creatures come out from perspiration and from a dead
body without any cause, the whole living world has come out of the material
combinations of the cosmic manifestation. Therefore material nature is the
cause of this manifestation, and there is no other cause. They do not believe in
the words of Krsna in Bhagavad-gitc‘t: mayadhyaksena prakrtih sﬁyate
sa-carc‘tcamm. “Under My direction the whole material world is moving.” In
other words, among the demons there is no perfect knowledge of the creation
of the world; every one of them has some particular theory of his own.
According to them, one interpretation of the scriptures is as good as another,
for they do not believe in a standard understanding of the scriptural
injunctions.

TEXT 9

'qﬁnamaqmsww
WWW Wmsﬁar IIQII

etc‘tm drstim avastabhya
nastc‘ttmc‘mo ’lpa—buddhayah
prabhavcmty ugra—karmc‘mah
ksayc‘tya jagato ’hitc‘th

SYNONYMS

etc‘Im—this; drstim—Vision; avastabhya—accepting; nasta—having lost;
c‘ttmc‘mah—themselves; alpa—buddhayah—the less intelligent;
prabhavanti—ﬂourish; ugra-karmc‘mah—engaged in painful activities;
ksayc‘tya—for destruction; jagatah—of the world; ahitc‘Ih—unbeneficial.

TRANSLATION
Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves and



who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible works meant to
destroy the world.

PURPORT

The demoniac are engaged in activities that will lead the world to
destruction. The Lord states here that they are less intelligent. The
materialists, who have no concept of God, think that they are advancing. But
according to Bhagavad-gitc‘t, they are unintelligent and devoid of all sense.
They try to enjoy this material world to the utmost limit and therefore always
engage in inventing something for sense gratification. Such materialistic
inventions are considered to be advancement of human civilization, but the
result is that people grow more and more Violent and more and more cruel,
cruel to animals and cruel to other human beings. They have no idea how to
behave toward one another. Animal killing is very prominent amongst
demoniac people. Such people are considered the enemies of the world because
ultimately they will invent or create something which will bring destruction to
all. Indirectly, this verse anticipates the invention of nuclear weapons, of
which the whole world is today very proud. At any moment war may take
place, and these atomic weapons may create havoc. Such things are created
solely for the destruction of the world, and this is indicated here. Due to
godlessness, such weapons are invented in human society; they are not meant
for the peace and prosperity of the world.

TEXT 10

WW gm: anmm'czlﬁam: I
WSW: || 9o II

kc‘tmam c‘ts’ritya duspmam
dambha—mc‘ma—madt‘mvitc‘th

mohc‘td grhitvc‘tsad-grc‘thc‘m

pravartcmte ’s’uci—watc‘th



SYNONYMS

kc‘tmam—lust; c‘ts’ritya—taking shelter of; duspmam—insatiable; dambha—of
pride; mc‘ma—and false prestige; mada-anvitc‘th—absorbed in the conceit;
mohc‘tt—by illusion; grhitvc‘I—taking; asat—nonpermanent; grc‘thc‘m—things;
pravartcmte—they ﬂourish; as’uci—to the unclean; watc‘th—avowed.

TRANSLATION

Taking shelter of insatiable lust and absorbed in the conceit of pride and
false prestige, the demoniac, thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work,
attracted by the impermanent.

PURPORT

The demoniac mentality is described here. The demons have no satiation
for their lust. They will go on increasing and increasing their insatiable desires
for material enjoyment. Although they are always full of anxieties on account
of accepting nonpermanent things, they still continue to engage in such
activities out of illusion. They have no knowledge and cannot tell that they are
heading the wrong way. Accepting nonpermanent things, such demoniac
people create their own God, create their own hymns and chant accordingly.
The result is that they become more and more attracted to two things—seX
enjoyment and accumulation of material wealth. The word as’uci-Umtc'th,
“unclean vows,” is very significant in this connection. Such demoniac people
are only attracted by wine, women, gambling and meat-eating; those are their
as’uci, unclean habits. Induced by pride and false prestige, they create some
principles of religion which are not approved by the Vedic injunctions.
Although such demoniac people are most abominable in the world, by artificial
means the world creates a false honor for them. Although they are gliding
toward hell, they consider themselves very much advanced.

TEXTS 11—12



WHWWH
WWW: || 99 ||
Wzmnaﬁwu
éaﬁwﬁmdnmﬁm‘amﬁu 912 ||

cintc‘tm aparimeyc‘tm ca

pralayc‘mtc‘tm upc‘ts’ritc‘th

kc‘tmopabhoga—paramc‘t

etc‘wad iti nis’citc‘th

c‘ts’c‘t—pc‘ts’a—s’atair baddhc‘th
kc‘tma—krodha—parc‘tyanc‘th
ihcmte kc‘tma—bhogc‘trtham
anyayem‘trtha—saﬁcayc‘m

SYNONYMS

cintc‘tm—fears and anxieties; aparimeyc‘tm—immeasurable; ca—and;
pralaya—antc‘tm—unto the point of death; upc‘ts’ritc‘th—having taken shelter of;
kc‘tma—upabhoga—sense gratification; parame‘th—the highest goal of life;
etc'wat—thus; iti—in this way; nis’citc‘th—having ascertained;
c'ts’c't-pc'ts’a—entanglements in a network of hope; s’ataih—by hundreds;
baddhc‘th—being bound; kama—of lust; krodha—and anger;
parc‘tyanc‘th—always situated in the mentality; ihcmte—they desire; kc‘tma—lust;
bhoga—sense enjoyment; artham—for the purpose of; anyayena—illegally;
artha—of wealth; saﬁcayc‘m—accumulation.

TRANSLATION

They believe that to gratify the senses is the prime necessity of human
civilization. Thus until the end of life their anxiety is immeasurable. Bound by
a network of hundreds of thousands of desires and absorbed in lust and anger,
they secure money by illegal means for sense gratification.



PURPORT

The demoniac accept that the enjoyment of the senses is the ultimate goal
of life, and this concept they maintain until death. They do not believe in life
after death, and they do not believe that one takes on different types of bodies
according to one’s karma, or activities in this world. Their plans for life are
never finished, and they go on preparing plan after plan, all of which are never
finished. We have personal experience of a person of such demoniac mentality
who, even at the point of death, was requesting the physician to prolong his
life for four years more because his plans were not yet complete. Such foolish
people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life even for a moment.
When the notice is there, there is no consideration of the man’s desire. The
laws of nature do not allow a second beyond what one is destined to enjoy.

The demoniac person, who has no faith in God or the Supersoul within
himself, performs all kinds of sinful activities simply for sense gratification. He
does not know that there is a witness sitting within his heart. The Supersoul is
observing the activities of the individual soul. As it is stated in the Upanisads,
there are two birds sitting in one tree; one is acting and enjoying or suffering
the fruits of the branches, and the other is witnessing. But one who is
demoniac has no knowledge of Vedic scripture, nor has he any faith; therefore
he feels free to do anything for sense enjoyment, regardless of the
consequences.

TEXTS 13—15

mmmﬁmﬁﬁml
Wﬁﬁﬁwﬁrmunu

aﬁwsazﬂaéﬁtﬁwmﬁl
s‘aﬁsan'a‘wﬁ'v'ﬁfaﬁss‘amma‘ru 98 ||
mﬁsmﬁaﬁﬁqﬁsakfhagiﬁnmI



aﬁmﬁﬁtﬁwmﬁﬁﬁﬁmzuwu

idam adya mayc‘t labdham
imam prc‘tpsye manomtham
idam astidam api me
bhavisyati punar dhcmam

asau mayc‘t hatah s’atrm
ham'sye cc‘tparc‘m api
is’varo ’ham aham bhogi
siddho ’ham balavdn sukhi

adhyo ’bhijanavc‘m asmi

k0 ’nyo ’sti sadrs’o mayc‘t

yaksye dc‘tsyc‘tmi modisya
ity ajﬁc‘ma—vimohitc‘th

SYNONYMS

idam—this; adya—today; maya—by me; labdham—gained; imam—this;
prc‘tpsye—I shall gain; manah-ratham—according to my desires; idam—this;
asti—there is; idam—this; api—also; me—mine; bhavisyati—it will increase in
the future; punah—again; dhcmam—wealth; asau—that; maya—by me;
hatah—has been killed; s’atruh—enemy; ham'sye—I shall kill; ca—also;
aparc‘m—others; api—certainly; is’varah—the lord; aham—I am; aham—I am;
bhogi—the enjoyer; siddhah—perfect; aham—I am; bala—vc‘m—powerful;
sukhi—happy; adhyah—wealthy; abhijana—vc‘m—surrounded by aristocratic
relatives; asmi—I am; kah—who; anyah—other; asti—there is; sadrs’ah—like;
maya—me; yaksye—I shall sacrifice; dasyc‘tmi—I shall give charity; modisye—I
shall rejoice; iti—thus; ajﬁc'ma—by ignorance; Uimohitc'th—deluded.

TRANSLATION

The demoniac person thinks: “So much wealth do I have today, and I will
gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase



in the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I have killed him, and my
other enemies will also be killed. I am the lord of everything. I am the enjoyer. I
am perfect, powerful and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by
aristocratic relatives. There is none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall
perform sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice.” In this
way, such persons are deluded by ignorance.

TEXT 16

WWWWH
WzmﬁﬁgqaﬁaWsﬁu 95 ||

aneka—citta-vibhrc‘mtc‘t

moha—jc‘tla—samc‘wrtc‘th
prasaktc‘th kc‘tma-bhogesu

patcmti narake ’s’ucau

SYNONYMS

aneka—numerous; citta—by anxieties; vibhrc‘mtc‘th—perplexed; moha—of
illusions; jc‘tla—by a network; samc‘wrtc‘th—surrounded; prasaktc‘th—attached;
kc‘tma—bhogesu—to sense gratification; patcmti—they glide down; narake—into
hell; as’ucau—unclean.

TRANSLATION

Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of illusions,
they become too strongly attached to sense enjoyment and fall down into hell.

PURPORT

The demoniac man knows no limit to his desire to acquire money. That is
unlimited. He thinks only of how much assessment he has just now and
schemes to engage that stock of wealth further and further. For that reason, he



does not hesitate to act in any sinful way and so deals in the black market for
illegal gratification. He is enamored by the possessions he has already, such as
land, family, house and bank balance, and he is always planning to improve
them. He believes in his own strength, and he does not know that whatever he
is gaining is due to his past good deeds. He is given an opportunity to
accumulate such things, but he has no conception of past causes. He simply
thinks that all his mass of wealth is due to his own endeavor. A demoniac
person believes in the strength of his personal work, not in the law of karma.
According to the law of karma, a man takes his birth in a high family, or
becomes rich, or very well educated, or very beautiful because of good work in
the past. The demoniac think that all these things are accidental and due to
the strength of one’s personal ability. They do not sense any arrangement
behind all the varieties of people, beauty and education. Anyone who comes
into competition with such a demoniac man is his enemy. There are many
demoniac people, and each is enemy to the others. This enmity becomes more
and more deep—between persons, then between families, then between
societies, and at last between nations. Therefore there is constant strife, war
and enmity all over the world.

Each demoniac person thinks that he can live at the sacrifice of all others.
Generally, a demoniac person thinks of himself as the Supreme God, and a
demoniac preacher tells his followers: “Why are you seeking God elsewhere.7
You are all yourselves God! Whatever you like, you can do. Don’t believe in
God. Throw away God. God is dead.” These are the demoniac’s preachings.

Although the demoniac person sees others equally rich and inﬂuential, or
even more so, he thinks that no one is richer than he and that no one is more
inﬂuential than he. As far as promotion to the higher planetary system is
concerned, he does not believe in performing yajﬁas, or sacrifices. Demons
think that they will manufacture their own process of yajﬁa and prepare some
machine by which they will be able to reach any higher planet. The best
example of such a demoniac man was Ravana. He offered a program to the
people by which he would prepare a staircase so that anyone could reach the
heavenly planets without performing sacrifices, such as are prescribed in the
Vedas. Similarly, in the present age such demoniac men are striving to reach



the higher planetary systems by mechanical arrangements. These are examples
of bewilderment. The result is that, without their knowledge, they are gliding
toward hell. Here the Sanskrit word moha-jc'tla is very significant. Jc'tla means
“net”; like fish caught in a net, they have no way to come out.

TEXT 17

Wm:awa=mmarﬁamzl
WWWWIINII

c‘ttma—sambhc‘witc‘th stabdhc‘t

dhana—mc‘ma-madt‘mvitc‘th
yajcmte nc‘tma-yajﬁais te

dambhenc‘widhi—pmvakam

SYNONYMS

c‘ttma—sambhc‘witc‘th—self-complacent; stabdhc‘Ih—impudent; dhana—mc‘ma—of
wealth and false prestige; mada—in the delusion; anvitc‘th—absorbed;
yajcmte—they perform sacrifice; nc‘tma—in name only; yajﬁaih—with
sacrifices; te—they; dambhena—out of pride; avidhi-pmvakam—without
following any rules and regulations.

TRANSLATION

Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false prestige,
they sometimes proudly perform sacrifices in name only, without following any
rules or regulations.

PURPORT

Thinking themselves all in all, not caring for any authority or scripture, the
demoniac sometimes perform so-called religious or sacrificial rites. And since
they do not believe in authority, they are very impudent. This is due to illusion



caused by accumulating some wealth and false prestige. Sometimes such
demons take up the role of preacher, mislead the people, and become known as
religious reformers or as incarnations of God. They make a show of performing
sacrifices, or they worship the demigods, or manufacture their own God.
Common men advertise them as God and worship them, and by the foolish
they are considered advanced in the principles of religion, or in the principles
of spiritual knowledge. They take the dress of the renounced order of life and
engage in all nonsense in that dress. Actually there are so many restrictions for
one who has renounced this world. The demons, however, do not care for such
restrictions. They think that whatever path one can create is one’s own path;
there is no such thing as a standard path one has to follow. The word
avidhi-pmvakam, meaning a disregard for the rules and regulations, is
especially stressed here. These things are always due to ignorance and illusion.

TEXT 18
Maﬁiﬁmaﬁﬁamn
WWSW: || 9= ||

ahahkc‘tram balam darpam
kamam krodham ca sams’ritc‘th
mam c‘ttma—para—dehesu
pradviscmto ’bhyasﬁyakc‘th

SYNONYMS

ahahkc‘tram—false ego; balam—strength; darpam—pride; kc‘tmam—lust;
krodham—anger; ca—also; sams’ritc‘th—having taken shelter of; mc‘tm—Me;
c‘ttma—in their own; para—and in other; dehesu—bodies;
pradvisantah—blaspheming; abhyasﬁyakdh—envious.

TRANSLATION
Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demons become



envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in their own
bodies and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme against the real religion.

PURPORT

A demoniac person, being always against God’s supremacy, does not like to
believe in the scriptures. He is envious of both the scriptures and the existence
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is caused by his so-called prestige
and his accumulation of wealth and strength. He does not know that the
present life is a preparation for the next life. Not knowing this, he is actually
envious of his own self, as well as of others. He commits Violence on other
bodies and on his own. He does not care for the supreme control of the
Personality of Godhead, because he has no knowledge. Being envious of the
scriptures and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he puts forward false
arguments against the existence of God and denies the scriptural authority. He
thinks himself independent and powerful in every action. He thinks that since
no one can equal him in strength, power or wealth, he can act in any way and
no one can stop him. If he has an enemy who might check the advancement of
his sensual activities, he makes plans to cut him down by his own power.

TEXT 19

WW:WI%§WI
WWWIIRII

tc‘m aham dvisatah krmc‘m
samsc‘tresu naradhamc‘m
ksipc‘tmy ajasram as’ubhc‘m
c‘tsurisv eva yom'su

SYNONYMS

tc‘m—those; aham—I; dvisatah—envious; krmc‘m—mischievous;
samsc‘tresu—into the ocean of material existence; nara—adhamc‘m—the lowest



of mankind; ksipc‘tmi—I put; ajasram—forever; as’ubhc‘m—inauspicious;
dsurisu—demoniac; eva—certainly; yom'su—into the wombs.

TRANSLATION

Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, I
perpetually cast into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac
species of life.

PURPORT

In this verse it is clearly indicated that the placing of a particular individual
soul in a particular body is the prerogative of the supreme will. The demoniac
person may not agree to accept the supremacy of the Lord, and it is a fact that
he may act according to his own whims, but his next birth will depend upon
the decision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and not on himself. In the
Srimad—Bhagavatam, Third Canto, it is stated that an individual soul, after his
death, is put into the womb of a mother where he gets a particular type of body
under the supervision of superior power. Therefore in the material existence
we find so many species of life—animals, insects, men, and so on. All are
arranged by the superior power. They are not accidental. As for the demoniac,
it is clearly said here that they are perpetually put into the wombs of demons,
and thus they continue to be envious, the lowest of mankind. Such demoniac
species of men are held to be always full of lust, always Violent and hateful and
always unclean. The many kinds of hunters in the jungle are considered to
belong to the demoniac species of life.

TEXT 20

aﬁﬁa‘rﬁmwwﬁawﬁl
Wﬁaﬁﬁaaﬁrmwﬁquwu

asurim yom'm apannc‘t
mﬁdhc‘t janmani janmani



mam aprc‘tpyaiva kaunteya
tato yc‘mty adhamc‘tm gatim

SYNONYMS

c‘tsurim—demoniac; yonim—species; c‘tpanm‘th—gaining; mﬁdhc‘th—the foolish;
janmcmi janmcmi—in birth after birth; mc‘tm—Me; aprc‘tpya—without
achieving; eva—certainly; kaunteya—O son of Kunti; tatah—thereafter;
yc‘mti—go; adhamc‘Im—condemned; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, 0 son of
Kunti, such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the
most abominable type of existence.

PURPORT

It is known that God is all-merciful, but here we find that God is never
merciful to the demoniac. It is clearly stated that the demoniac people, life
after life, are put into the wombs of similar demons, and, not achieving the
mercy of the Supreme Lord, they go down and down, so that at last they
achieve bodies like those of cats, dogs and hogs. It is clearly stated that such
demons have practically no chance of receiving the mercy of God at any stage
of later life. In the Vedas also it is stated that such persons gradually sink to
become dogs and hogs. It may be then argued in this connection that God
should not be advertised as all-merciful if He is not merciful to such demons.
In answer to this question, in the Vedc'mta-sﬁtm we find that the Supreme Lord
has no hatred for anyone. The placing of the asmas, the demons, in the lowest
status of life is simply another feature of His mercy. Sometimes the asmas are
killed by the Supreme Lord, but this killing is also good for them, for in Vedic
literature we find that anyone who is killed by the Supreme Lord becomes
liberated. There are instances in history of many asmas—Ravana, Kamsa,
Hiranyakas’ipu—to whom the Lord appeared in various incarnations just to



kill them. Therefore God’s mercy is shown to the asmas if they are fortunate
enough to be killed by Him.

TEXT 21
ﬁﬁm’ Hawaii 8|? WW: I
w: Wat W ash" :99 II

tri—Uidham narakasyedam
dvc‘tram nc‘ts’anam dtmcmah

kc‘tmah krodhas tathd lobhas

tasmc‘td etat trayam tyajet

SYNONYMS

tri—vidham—of three kinds; narakasya—of hell; idam—this; dvc‘tram—gate;
nc‘ts’anam—destructive; c‘ttmanah—of the self; kc‘tmah—lust; krodhah—anger;
tathc‘I—as well as; lobhah—greed; tasmc‘It—therefore; etat—these;
trayam—three; tyajet—one must give up.

TRANSLATION

There are three gates leading to this hell—lust, anger and greed. Every sane
man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul.

PURPORT

The beginning of demoniac life is described herein. One tries to satisfy his
lust, and when he cannot, anger and greed arise. A sane man who does not
want to glide down to the species of demoniac life must try to give up these
three enemies, which can kill the self to such an extent that there will be no
possibility of liberation from this material entanglement.

TEXT 22



Qﬁﬁfﬁzﬁﬁaaﬁﬁféﬁﬁm
Wzﬁmmﬁrqﬁwﬁlttuqqu

etair Uimuktah kaunteya
tamo-dvc‘trais tribhir narah
c‘tcaraty dtmanah s’reyas
tato yc‘tti parc‘tm gatim

SYNONYMS

etaih—from these; vimuktah—being liberated; kaunteya—O son of Kunti;
tamah—dvc‘traih—from the gates of ignorance; tribhih—of three kinds; narah—a
person; c‘tcarati—performs; c‘ttmanah—for the self; s’reyah—benediction;
tatah—thereafter; yc‘tti—he goes; parc‘tm—to the supreme; gatim—destination.

TRANSLATION

The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, 0 son of Kunti, performs
acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attains the supreme
destination.

PURPORT

One should be very careful of these three enemies to human life: lust, anger
and greed. The more a person is freed from lust, anger and greed, the more his
existence becomes pure. Then he can follow the rules and regulations enjoined
in the Vedic literature. By following the regulative principles of human life,
one gradually raises himself to the platform of spiritual realization. If one is so
fortunate, by such practice, to rise to the platform of Krsna consciousness,
then success is guaranteed for him. In the Vedic literature, the ways of action
and reaction are prescribed to enable one to come to the stage of purification.
The whole method is based on giving up lust, greed and anger. By cultivating
knowledge of this process, one can be elevated to the highest position of



self-realization; this self-realization is perfected in devotional serVice. In that
devotional serVice, the liberation of the conditioned soul is guaranteed.
Therefore, according to the Vedic system, there are instituted the four orders
of life and the four statuses of life, called the caste system and the spiritual
order system. There are different rules and regulations for different castes or
divisions of society, and if a person is able to follow them, he will be
automatically raised to the highest platform of spiritual realization. Then he
can have liberation without a doubt.

TEXT 23

uzmﬁmﬁaﬁaﬁmn
HHWHEHHWWIIQEIII

yah s’c‘tstra-vidhim utsrjya
vartate kc‘tma-kc‘tratah
na sa siddhim avc‘tpnoti
ha sukham ha parc‘tm gatim

SYNONYMS

yah—anyone who; s’c'tstTa-Uidhim—the regulations of the scriptures;
utsrjya—giving up; vartate—remains; kc‘tma—kc‘tratah—acting whimsically in
lust; na—never; sah—he; siddhim—perfection; avc‘tpnoti—achieves;
na—never; sukham—happiness; na—never; parc‘tm—the supreme;
gatim—perfectional stage.

TRANSLATION

He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims
attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.

PURPORT



As described before, the s’c‘tstTa-Uidhi, or the direction of the s’c'tstm, is given
to the different castes and orders of human society. Everyone is expected to
follow these rules and regulations. If one does not follow them and acts
whimsically according to his lust, greed and desire, then he never will be
perfect in his life. In other words, a man may theoretically know all these
things, but if he does not apply them in his own life, then he is to be known as
the lowest of mankind. In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to
be sane and to follow the regulations given for elevating his life to the highest
platform, but if he does not follow them, then he degrades himself. But even if
he follows the rules and regulations and moral principles and ultimately does
not come to the stage of understanding the Supreme Lord, then all his
knowledge becomes spoiled. And even if he accepts the existence of God, if he
does not engage himself in the serVice of the Lord his attempts are spoiled.
Therefore one should gradually raise himself to the platform of Krsna
consciousness and devotional serVice; it is then and there that he can attain
the highest perfectional stage, not otherwise.

The word kama-kc'tmtah is very significant. A person who knowingly
violates the rules acts in lust. He knows that this is forbidden, but still he acts.
This is called acting whimsically. He knows that this should be done, but still
he does not do it; therefore he is called whimsical. Such persons are destined to
be condemned by the Supreme Lord. Such persons cannot have the perfection
which is meant for the human life. The human life is especially meant for
purifying one’s existence, and one who does not follow the rules and
regulations cannot purify himself, nor can he attain the real stage of
happiness.

TEXT 24
mmammmI
meﬁaﬁﬁzﬁﬁ-mwu

tasmc‘tc chc‘tstram pramc‘mam te



kc‘tryc‘tkc‘trya—vyavasthitau
jﬁc‘ttvc‘t s’c‘tstra—vidhc‘moktam
karma kartum ihc‘trhasi

SYNONYMS

tasmc‘It—therefore; s’c‘tstram—the scriptures; pramc‘mam—evidence; te—your;
kdrya—duty; akc‘wya—and forbidden activities; vyavasthitau—in determining;
jﬁc‘ttvc‘I—knowing; s’c‘tstra—of scripture; Uidhc‘ma—the regulations; uktam—as
declared; karma—work; kartum—do; iha—in this world; arhasi—you should.

TRANSLATION

One should therefore understand what is duty and what is not duty by the
regulations of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should
act so that he may gradually be elevated.

PURPORT

As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all the rules and regulations of the
Vedas are meant for knowing Krsna. If one understands Krsna from the
Bhagavad-gitc‘t and becomes situated in Krsna consciousness, engaging himself
in devotional serVice, he has reached the highest perfection of knowledge
offered by the Vedic literature. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu made this process
very easy: He asked people simply to chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare and to
engage in the devotional serVice of the Lord and eat the remnants of foodstuff
offered to the Deity. One who is directly engaged in all these devotional
activities is to be understood as having studied all Vedic literature. He has
come to the conclusion perfectly. Of course, for the ordinary persons who are
not in Krsna consciousness or who are not engaged in devotional serVice, what
is to be done and what is not to be done must be decided by the injunctions of
the Vedas. One should act accordingly, without argument. That is called
following the principles of s’c'tstm, or scripture. gastra is without the four



principal defects that are Visible in the conditioned soul: imperfect senses, the
propensity for cheating, certainty of committing mistakes, and certainty of
being illusioned. These four principal defects in conditioned life disqualify one
from putting forth rules and regulations. Therefore, the rules and regulations
as described in the s’c‘tstTa—being above these defects—are accepted without
alteration by all great saints, c'tcc'tryas and great souls.

In India there are many parties of spiritual understanding, generally
classified as two: the impersonalist and the personalist. Both of them, however,
lead their lives according to the principles of the Vedas. Without following the
principles of the scriptures, one cannot elevate himself to the perfectional
stage. One who actually, therefore, understands the purport of the s’c‘tstms is
considered fortunate.

In human society, aversion to the principles of understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the cause of all falldowns. That is the greatest
offense of human life. Therefore, mc‘tyc't, the material energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is always giving us trouble in the shape of the
threefold miseries. This material energy is constituted of the three modes of
material nature. One has to raise himself at least to the mode of goodness
before the path to understanding the Supreme Lord can be opened. Without
raising oneself to the standard of the mode of goodness, one remains in
ignorance and passion, which are the cause of demoniac life. Those in the
modes of passion and ignorance deride the scriptures, deride the holy man, and
deride the proper understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They
disobey the instructions of the spiritual master, and they do not care for the
regulations of the scriptures. In spite of hearing the glories of devotional
serVice, they are not attracted. Thus they manufacture their own way of
elevation. These are some of the defects of human society which lead to the
demoniac status of life. If, however, one is able to be guided by a proper and
bona fide spiritual master, who can lead one to the path of elevation, to the
higher stage, then one’s life becomes successful.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixteenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divine and Demoniac Natures.



 

The Divisions of Faith

TEXT 1

391—89391?
ammlm
éﬁiﬁmgmwamw II9II

arjuna uvc‘tca
ye s’c‘tstra-vidhim utsrjya
yajcmte s’raddhayc‘mvitc‘th
test‘tm m'sthc‘t tu kc‘t krsna
sattvam c‘tho rajas tamah

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; ye—those who; s’c‘tstra-vidhim—the regulations of
scripture; utsrjya—giving up; yajcmte—worship; s’raddhayc‘t—full faith;
anvitc‘th—possessed of; tesam—of them; nisthc‘I—the faith; tu—but; kc‘t—what;
krsna—O Krsna; sattvam—in goodness; c‘tho—or else; rajah—in passion;
tamah—in ignorance.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna inquired: O Krsna, what is the situation of those who do not follow
the principles of scripture but worship according to their own imagination? Are



they in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?

PURPORT

In the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person faithful to
a particular type of worship gradually becomes elevated to the stage of
knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage of peace and prosperity.
In the Sixteenth Chapter, it is concluded that one who does not follow the
principles laid down in the scriptures is called an asma, demon, and one who
follows the scriptural injunctions faithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now,
if one, with faith, follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scriptural
injunctions, what is his position.7 This doubt of Arjuna’s is to be cleared by
Krsna. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting a human being and
placing their faith in him worshiping in goodness, passion or ignorance? Do
such persons attain the perfectional stage of life? Is it possible for them to be
situated in real knowledge and elevate themselves to the highest perfectional
stage.7 Do those who do not follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures
but who have faith in something and worship gods and demigods and men
attain success in their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Krsna.

TEXT 2

WI
ﬁﬁmnaﬁraméﬁﬁfmmI
mﬁaaﬁaaa‘ﬁamna‘IT—Zlﬁrafﬂuqu

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
tri—vidhc‘t bhavati s’raddhc‘t
dehmam $67 svabhc‘wa—jc‘t

sc‘tttviki rc‘tjasi caiva

tc‘tmasi ceti tam s’mu



SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri—vidhc‘I—of
three kinds; bhavati—becomes; s’raddhc‘t—the faith; dehinc‘Im—of the
embodied; sc't—that; sva-bhc‘wa-jc‘t—according to his mode of material nature;
sc'tttviki—in the mode of goodness; Tajasi—in the mode of passion; ca—also;
eva—certainly; tc'tmasi—in the mode of ignorance; ca—and; iti—thus;
tc‘tm—that; s’mu—hear from Me.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: According to the modes of nature
acquired by the embodied soul, one’s faith can be of three kinds—in goodness,
in passion or in ignorance. Now hear about this.

PURPORT

Those who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures but out of
laziness or indolence give up following these rules and regulations are
governed by the modes of material nature. According to their previous
activities in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, they acquire a nature
which is of a specific quality. The association of the living entity with the
different modes of nature has been going on perpetually; since the living entity
is in contact with material nature, he acquires different types of mentality
according to his association with the material modes. But this nature can be
changed if one associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by his
rules and the scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position from
ignorance to goodness, or from passion to goodness. The conclusion is that
blind faith in a particular mode of nature cannot help a person become
elevated to the perfectional stage. One has to consider things carefully, with
intelligence, in the association of a bona fide spiritual master. Thus one can
change his position to a higher mode of nature.



TEXT 3

mmmmﬁaml
Wsziwzﬁmzaqaaulsu

sattvc‘mmﬁpc‘t sarvasya
s’raddhc‘t bhavati bhc‘trata
s’raddhc‘I—mayo ’yam purusa
yo yac—chraddhah sa eva sah

SYNONYMS

sattva—anmﬁpc‘t—according to the existence; sarvasya—of everyone;
s’raddhc‘I—faith; bhavati—becomes; bhc‘trata—O son of Bharata;
s’raddhc‘I—faith; mayah—full of; ayam—this; purusah—living entity;
yah—who; yat—having which; s’raddhah—faith; sah—thus; eva—certainly;
sah—he.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Bharata, according to one’s existence under the various modes of
nature, one evolves a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a
particular faith according to the modes he has acquired.

PURPORT

Everyone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But his
faith is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to the nature he has
acquired. Thus, according to his particular type of faith, one associates with
certain persons. Now the real fact is that every living being, as is stated in the
Fifteenth Chapter, is originally a fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord. Therefore one is originally transcendental to all the modes of material
nature. But when one forgets his relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and comes into contact with the material nature in conditional life,



he generates his own position by association with the different varieties of
material nature. The resultant artificial faith and existence are only material.
Although one may be conducted by some impression, or some conception of
life, originally he is nirguna, or transcendental. Therefore one has to become
cleansed of the material contamination that he has acquired, in order to regain
his relationship with the Supreme Lord. That is the only path back without
fear: Krsna consciousness. If one is situated in Krsna consciousness, then that
path is guaranteed for his elevation to the perfectional stage. If one does not
take to this path of self-realization, then he is surely to be conducted by the
inﬂuence of the modes of nature.

The word s’raddhc‘t, or “faith,” is very significant in this verse. Sraddha, or
faith, originally comes out of the mode of goodness. One’s faith may be in a
demigod or some created God or some mental concoction. One’s strong faith is
supposed to be productive of works of material goodness. But in material
conditional life, no works are completely purified. They are mixed. They are
not in pure goodness. Pure goodness is transcendental; in purified goodness
one can understand the real nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
As long as one’s faith is not completely in purified goodness, the faith is
subject to contamination by any of the modes of material nature. The
contaminated modes of material nature expand to the heart. Therefore
according to the position of the heart in contact with a particular mode of
material nature, one’s faith is established. It should be understood that if one’s
heart is in the mode of goodness his faith is also in the mode of goodness. If his
heart is in the mode of passion, his faith is also in the mode of passion. And if
his heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his faith is also thus
contaminated. Thus we find different types of faith in this world, and there
are different types of religions due to different types of faith. The real
principle of religious faith is situated in the mode of pure goodness, but
because the heart is tainted we find different types of religious principles. Thus
according to different types of faith, there are different kinds of worship.

TEXT 4



mmmmmmmu
wwwmmmzmu

yajcmte sc‘tttvikc‘t devc‘m
yaksa—raksc‘tmsi rc‘tjasc‘th
pretc‘m thZta—ganc‘tms’ cc‘mye
yajcmte tc‘tmasc‘t janc‘th

SYNONYMS

yajante—worship; sc'tttvikc'th—those who are in the mode of goodness;
devc‘m—demigods; yaksa—raksc‘tmsi—demons; rc‘tjasc‘Ih—those who are in the
mode of passion; pretc‘m—spirits of the dead; bhﬁta—ganc‘m—ghosts; ca—and;
anye—others; yajante—worship; tc‘tmasc‘th—in the mode of ignorance;
janc‘Ih—people.

TRANSLATION

Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of
passion worship the demons; and those in the mode of ignorance worship ghosts
and spirits.

PURPORT

In this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different kinds
of worshipers according to their external activities. According to scriptural
injunction, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshipable, but those
who are not very conversant with, or faithful to, the scriptural injunctions
worship different objects, according to their specific situations in the modes of
material nature. Those who are situated in goodness generally worship the
demigods. The demigods include Brahma, Siva and others such as Indra,
Candra and the sun-god. There are various demigods. Those in goodness
worship a particular demigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are
in the mode of passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second



World War a man in Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war he
had amassed a large amount of wealth by dealing in the black market.
Similarly, those in the modes of passion and ignorance generally select a
powerful man to be God. They think that anyone can be worshiped as God
and that the same results will be obtained.

Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode of passion
worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of ignorance, in
darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship at the tomb of some
dead man. Sexual serVice is also considered to be in the mode of darkness.
Similarly, in remote Villages in India there are worshipers of ghosts. We have
seen that in India the lower-class people sometimes go to the forest, and if they
have knowledge that a ghost lives in a tree, they worship that tree and offer
sacrifices. These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship. God
worship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in pure goodness. In
the grimad-Bbégavatam (4.3.23) it is said, sattvam vis’uddham
vasudeUa-§abditam: “When a man is situated in pure goodness, he worships
Vasudeva.” The purport is that those who are completely purified of the
material modes of nature and who are transcendentally situated can worship
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness, and
they worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonal Visnu form
in the material world, which is known as philosophized Visnu. Visnu is the
expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but the impersonalists,
because they do not ultimately believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
imagine that the Visnu form is just another aspect of the impersonal Brahman;
similarly, they imagine that Lord Brahma is the impersonal form in the
material mode of passion. Thus they sometimes describe five kinds of gods that
are worshipable, but because they think that the actual truth is impersonal
Brahman, they dispose of all worshipable objects at the ultimate end. In
conclusion, the different qualities of the material modes of nature can be
purified through association with persons who are of transcendental nature.

TEXTS 5—6



mﬁﬁéﬁimﬁaﬁamzl
szmﬁamzuau
Wzmwmﬁaau
wm:mmﬁﬁwﬁmusu

as’c‘tstra—Uihitam ghoram

tapycmte ye tapo janc‘th
dambhc‘thahkc‘tra-samyuktc‘th

kc‘tma—rc‘tga—balc‘mvitc‘th

karsayantah s’arira—stham
thZta—grc‘tmam acetasah
mam caivc‘mtah s’arira—stham
tc‘m viddhy c‘tsma—nis’cayc‘m

SYNONYMS

as’c‘tstra—not in the scriptures; vihitam—directed; ghoram—harmful to others;
tapyante—undergo; ye—those who; tapah—austerities; janc‘Ih—persons;
dambha—with pride; ahahkc‘tra—and egoism; samyuktc‘th—engaged; kc‘tma—of
lust; rc‘tga—and attachment; bala—by the force; anvitc‘Ih—impelled;
karsayantah—tormenting; s’arira—stham—situated within the body;
bhﬁta—grc‘tmam—the combination of material elements; acetasah—having a
misled mentality; mc‘tm—Me; ca—also; eva—certainly; antah—within;
s’arira—stham—situated in the body; tc‘m—them; Uiddhi—understand;
c‘tsura—nis’cayc‘m—demons.

TRANSLATION

Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in the
scriptures, performing them out of pride and egoism, who are impelled by lust
and attachment, who are foolish and who torture the material elements of the
body as well as the Supersoul dwelling within, are to be known as demons.



PURPORT

There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penance which
are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting for some
ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end, is not mentioned in
the scriptural directions. The scriptures recommend fasting for spiritual
advancement, not for some political end or social purpose. Persons who take to
such austerities are, according to Bhagavad-gitc‘t, certainly demoniac. Their acts
are against the scriptural injunctions and are not beneficial for the people in
general. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust and attachment for
material enjoyment. By such activities, not only is the combination of material
elements of which the body is constructed disturbed, but also the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself living within the body. Such unauthorized
fasting or austerities for some political end are certainly very disturbing to
others. They are not mentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person
may think that he can force his enemy or other parties to comply with his
desire by this method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are
not approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that those
who engage in them are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience to
the Vedic scriptural injunctions. The word acetasah is significant in this
connection. Persons of normal mental condition must obey the scriptural
injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglect and disobey the
scriptures and manufacture their own way of austerities and penances. One
should always remember the ultimate end of the demoniac people, as described
in the previous chapter. The Lord forces them to take birth in the wombs of
demoniac persons. Consequently they will live by demoniac principles life
after life without knowing their relationship with the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. If, however, such persons are fortunate enough to be guided by a
spiritual master who can direct them to the path of Vedic wisdom, they can get
out of this entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.



TEXT 7

WWWWWH
WWEﬁﬁﬁiﬁEﬁﬁﬂImu

c‘thc‘tras tv api sarvasya

tri-vidho bhavati priyah
yajﬁas tapas tathd dc‘mam
test‘tm bhedam imam s’mu

SYNONYMS

c‘thc‘trah—eating; tu—certainly; api—also; sarvasya—of everyone;
tri—vidhah—of three kinds; bhavati—there is; priyah—dear; yajﬁah—sacrifice;
tapah—austerity; tathc‘I—also; dc‘mam—charity; tesc‘tm—of them; bhedam—the
differences; imam—this; s’mu—hear.

TRANSLATION

Even the food each person prefers is of three kinds, according to the three
modes of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices, austerities and charity.
Now hear of the distinctions between them.

PURPORT

In terms of different situations in the modes of material nature, there are
differences in the manner of eating and performing sacrifices, austerities and
charities. They are not all conducted on the same level. Those who can
understand analytically what kind of performances are in what modes of
material nature are actually wise; those who consider all kinds of sacrifice or
food or charity to be the same cannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There
are missionary workers who advocate that one can do whatever he likes and
attain perfection. But these foolish guides are not acting according to the
direction of the scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the



people in general.

TEXT 8

mzaaaalﬁmglan‘lﬁrﬁadmn
I811: W:®UWW: WW: II = II

c‘tyuh—sattva—balc‘trogya-

sukha—priti—vivardham‘th
rasyc‘th snigdhc‘th sthirc‘t hrdyc‘t

c‘thc‘m‘th sc‘tttvika—priyc‘th

SYNONYMS

c‘tyuh—duration of life; sattva—existence; bala—strength; c‘trogya—health;
sukha—happiness; priti—and satisfaction; vivardham‘th—increasing;
rasyc‘th—juicy; snigdhc‘Ih—fatty; sthirc‘th—enduring; hrdyc‘th—pleasing to the
heart; c'thc'm'th—food; sc'tttvika—to one in goodness; priyc‘th—palatable.

TRANSLATION

Foods dear to those in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life,
purify one’s existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction.
Such foods are juicy, fatty, wholesome, and pleasing to the heart.

TEXT 9

WWW: I
311813 WEI gzwﬁmm: II a II

katv—amla—lavanc‘tty-usna—
tiksna—rﬁksa—vidt‘thmah
c‘thc‘m‘t rc‘tjasasyestc‘t



duhkha—s’okc‘tmaya—pradc‘th

SYNONYMS

katu—bitter; amla—sour; lavana—salty; ati—usna—very hot; tiksna—pungent;
mksa—dry; vide‘thinah—burning; c‘thc‘trc‘th—food; rc‘tjasasya—to one in the mode
of passion; istc‘th—palatable; duhkha—distress; s’oka—misery; amaya—disease;
pradc'th—causing.

TRANSLATION

Foods that are too bitter, too sour, salty, hot, pungent, dry and burning are
dear to those in the mode of passion. Such foods cause distress, misery and
disease.

TEXT 10

wquﬁmaw
WWWWIHMI

yc‘tta—yc‘tmam gata—rasam
pﬁti paryusitam ca yat
ucchistam api cc‘tmedhyam
bhojanam tc‘tmasa—priyam

SYNONYMS

yt‘tta-yc‘tmam—food cooked three hours before being eaten;
gata—rasam—tasteless; pﬁti—bad-smelling; paryusitam—decomposed; ca—also;
yat—that which; ucchistam—remnants of food eaten by others; api—also;
ca—and; amedhyam—untouchable; bhojanam—eating; tc‘tmasa—to one in the
mode of darkness; priyam—dear.

TRANSLATION



Food prepared more than three hours before being eaten, food that is
tasteless, decomposed and putrid, and food consisting of remnants and
untouchable things is dear to those in the mode of darkness.

PURPORT

The purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the mind and
aid bodily strength. This is its only purpose. In the past, great authorities
selected those foods that best aid health and increase life’s duration, such as
milk products, sugar, rice, wheat, fruits and vegetables. These foods are very
dear to those in the mode of goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn
and molasses, while not very palatable in themselves, can be made pleasant
when mixed with milk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness.
All these foods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchable
things like meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighth verse, have
no connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animal fat is available in
the form of milk, which is the most wonderful of all foods. Milk, butter, cheese
and similar products give animal fat in a form which rules out any need for the
killing of innocent creatures. It is only through brute mentality that this
killing goes on. The civilized method of obtaining needed fat is by milk.
Slaughter is the way of subhumans. Protein is amply available through split
peas, dc'tl, whole wheat, etc.

Foods in the mode of passion, which are bitter, too salty, or too hot or
overly mixed with red pepper, cause misery by reducing the mucus in the
stomach, leading to disease. Foods in the mode of ignorance or darkness are
essentially those that are not fresh. Any food cooked more than three hours
before it is eaten (except prasc‘tdam, food offered to the Lord) is considered to
be in the mode of darkness. Because they are decomposing, such foods give a
bad odor, which often attracts people in this mode but repulses those in the
mode of goodness.

Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal that was
first offered to the Supreme Lord or first eaten by saintly persons, especially
the spiritual master. Otherwise the remnants of food are considered to be in



the mode of darkness, and they increase infection or disease. Such foodstuffs,
although very palatable to persons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked
nor even touched by those in the mode of goodness. The best food is the
remnants of what is offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In
Bhagavad-gitc‘t the Supreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of
vegetables, ﬂour and milk when offered with devotion. Patram puspam phalam
toyam. Of course, devotion and love are the chief things which the Supreme
Personality of Godhead accepts. But it is also mentioned that the prasc‘tdam
should be prepared in a particular way. Any food prepared by the injunctions
of the scripture and offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be
taken even if prepared long, long ago, because such food is transcendental.
Therefore to make food antiseptic, eatable and palatable for all persons, one
should offer food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 11

WWHWI
WWWHWHIWII

aphalc‘tkc‘mksibhir yajﬁo
Uidhi—disto ya ijyate

yastavyam eveti manah

samadhc‘tya sa sc‘tttvikah

SYNONYMS

aphala-c'tkc'mksibhih—by those devoid of desire for result; yajﬁah—sacrifice;
Uidhi-distah—according to the direction of scripture; yah—which; ijyate—is
performed; yastavyam—must be performed; eva—certainly; iti—thus;
manah—mind; same‘tdhc‘tya—fixing; sah—it; sc‘tttvikah—in the mode of
goodness.

TRANSLATION



Of sacrifices, the sacrifice performed according to the directions of scripture,
as a matter of duty, by those who desire no reward, is of the nature of goodness.

PURPORT

The general tendency is to offer sacrifice with some purpose in mind, but
here it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without any such desire. It
should be done as a matter of duty. Take, for example, the performance of
rituals in temples or in churches. Generally they are performed with the
purpose of material benefit, but that is not in the mode of goodness. One
should go to a temple or church as a matter of duty, offer respect to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and offer ﬂowers and eatables. Everyone
thinks that there is no use in going to the temple just to worship God. But
worship for economic benefit is not recommended in the scriptural
injunctions. One should go simply to offer respect to the Deity. That will place
one in the mode of goodness. It is the duty of every civilized man to obey the
injunctions of the scriptures and offer respect to the Supreme Personality of

Godhead.

TEXT 12

WanﬁmﬁqﬁaaﬁI
swaméseiaﬁﬁrﬁmunu

abhiscmdhc‘tya tu phalam
dambhc‘trtham api caiva yat
ijyate bharata-s’restha
tam yajﬁam viddhi rc‘tjasam

SYNONYMS

abhisandhc‘tya—desiring; tu—but; phalam—the result; dambha—pride;
artham—for the sake of; api—also; ca—and; eva—certainly; yat—that which;



ijyate—is performed; bharata-s’restha—O chief of the Bharatas; tam—that;
yajﬁam—sacrifice; Uiddhi—know; rc‘tjasam—in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

But the sacrifice performed for some material benefit, or for the sake of
pride, 0 chief of the Bharatas, you should know to be in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

Sometimes sacrifices and rituals are performed for elevation to the
heavenly kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Such sacrifices
or ritualistic performances are considered to be in the mode of passion.

TEXT 13
8831331133 ﬁrm I
@8383 33 EIFIH 11133913 U 93 ||

vidhi—hinam asrstc‘mnam
mantra—hinam adaksinam
s’raddhc‘I—virahitam yajﬁam
tc‘tmasam paricaksate

SYNONYMS

vidhi—hinam—without scriptural direction; asrsta—annam—without
distribution of prasc‘tdam; mantra—hinam—with no chanting of the Vedic
hymns; adaksinam—with no remunerations to the priests; s’raddhc‘t—faith;
virahitam—without; yajﬁam—sacrifice; tc‘tmasam—in the mode of ignorance;
paricaksate—is to be considered.

TRANSLATION

Any sacrifice performed without regard for the directions of scripture,



without distribution of prasadam [spiritual food], without chanting of Vedic
hymns and remunerations to the priests, and without faith is considered to be in
the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

Faith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness.
Sometimes people worship some demigod just to make money and then spend
the money for recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Such ceremonial
shows of religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They are all in the mode of
darkness; they produce a demoniac mentality and do not benefit human
society.

TEXT 14
33W .Tﬁiﬁﬁaﬁl
WHWWW || 98 ||

deva-dvija—gmu-prc‘tjﬁa—
pﬁjanam s’aucam c‘trjavam
brahmacaryam ahimsc‘t ca
s’c‘triram tapa ucyate

SYNONYMS

deva—of the Supreme Lord; dvija—the brc‘thmanas; guru—the spiritual master;
prc‘tjﬁa—and worshipable personalities; p12 jcmam—worship;
s’aucam—cleanliness; c‘trjavam—simplicity; brahmacaryam—celibacy;
ahimsc't—nonviolence; ca—also; s’c'trimm—pertaining to the body;
tapah—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION
Austerity of the body consists in worship of the Supreme Lord, the



brahmanas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the father and mother, and
in cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence.

PURPORT

The Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and
penance. First He explains the austerities and penances practiced by the body.
One should offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to the demigods, the
perfect, qualified brc‘thmanas and the spiritual master and superiors like father,
mother or any person who is conversant with Vedic knowledge. These should
be given proper respect. One should practice cleansing oneself externally and
internally, and he should learn to become simple in behavior. He should not do
anything which is not sanctioned by the scriptural injunctions. He should not
indulge in sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scripture only
in marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These are penances and
austerities as far as the body is concerned.

WWWWHMI
awwﬁaamaqmﬁuwu

anudvega—karam vc‘tkyam

satyam priya—hitam ca yat
svc‘tdhyc‘tyc‘tbhyasanam caiva

vc‘m-mayam tapa ucyate

SYNONYMS

anudvega-karam—not agitating; vc‘tkyam—words; satyam—truthful;
priya—dear; hitam—beneficial; ca—also; yat—which; svc‘tdhyc‘tya—of Vedic
study; abhyasanam—practice; ca—also; eva—certainly; vc‘tk—mayam—of the
voice; tapah—austerity; ucyate—is said to be.



TRANSLATION

Austerity of speech consists in speaking words that are truthful, pleasing,
beneficial, and not agitating to others, and also in regularly reciting Vedic
literature.

PURPORT

One should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others. Of
course, when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the instruction of his
students, but such a teacher should not speak to those who are not his students
if he will agitate their minds. This is penance as far as talking is concerned.
Besides that, one should not talk nonsense. The process of speaking in spiritual
circles is to say something upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote
from scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time, such
talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions, one may derive
the highest benefit and elevate human society. There is a limitless stock of
Vedic literature, and one should study this. This is called penance of speech.

TEXT 16

m:nmez: 311339 31319139813313: I
mm W II 93 ||

manah-prasc‘tdah saumyatvam
maunam c‘ttma—vinigrahah
bhc‘wa—sams’uddhir ity etat
tapo mc‘masam ucyate

SYNONYMS

manah—prasc‘tdah—satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam—being without
duplicity towards others; maunam—gravity; c'ttma—of the self;



vinigrahah—control; bhc‘wa—of one’s nature; sams’uddhih—purification;
iti—thus; etat—this; tapah—austerity; mc‘masam—of the mind; ucyate—is said
to be.

TRANSLATION

And satisfaction, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purification of one’s
existence are the austerities of the mind.

PURPORT

To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It should
be so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good for others. The best
training for the mind is gravity in thought. One should not deviate from Krsna
consciousness and must always avoid sense gratification. To purify one’s nature
is to become Krsna conscious. Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by
taking the mind away from thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think
of sense enjoyment, the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age
we unnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for sense
gratification, and so there is no possibility of the mind’s becoming satisfied.
The best course is to divert the mind to the Vedic literature, which is full of
satisfying stories, as in the Purc‘mas and the Mahabharata. One can take
advantage of this knowledge and thus become purified. The mind should be
devoid of duplicity, and one should think of the welfare of all. Silence means
that one is always thinking of self-realization. The person in Krsna
consciousness observes perfect silence in this sense. Control of the mind
means detaching the mind from sense enjoyment. One should be
straightforward in his dealings and thereby purify his existence. All these
qualities together constitute austerity in mental activities.

TEXT 17

ammaﬁmﬁaﬁm‘ﬁzl



W: BTW 3832913 II 99 II

s’raddhayc‘t parayc‘t taptam
tapas tat tri—Uidham naraih
aphalc‘tkc‘mksibhir yuktaih

sc‘tttvikam paricaksate

SYNONYMS

s’raddhayc‘t—with faith; parayc‘I—transcendental; taptam—executed;
tapah—austerity; tat—that; tri—vidham—of three kinds; naraih—by men;
aphala-c'tkc'mksibhih—who are without desires for fruits; yuktaih—engaged;
sc‘tttvikam—in the mode of goodness; paricaksate—is called.

TRANSLATION

This threefold austerity, performed with transcendental faith by men not
expecting material benefits but engaged only for the sake of the Supreme, is
called austerity in goodness.

TEXT 18

ammwm‘aﬁalﬁﬁaaml
WWWWWIIFII

satkc‘tra—mc‘ma—pﬁjc‘trtham
tapo dambhena caiva yat
kriyate tad iha proktam

rc‘tjasam calam adhmvam

SYNONYMS

sat—kc‘tra—respect; mc‘ma—honor; pﬁjc‘t—and worship; artham—for the sake of;
tapah—austerity; dambhena—with pride; ca—also; eva—certainly;



yat—which; kriyate—is performed; tat—that; iha—in this world; proktam—is
said; rc‘tjasam—in the mode of passion; calam—ﬂickering;
adhmvam—temporary.

TRANSLATION

Penance performed out of pride and for the sake of gaining respect, honor
and worship is said to be in the mode of passion. It is neither stable nor
permanent.

PURPORT

Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and receive
honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode of passion
arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their feet and offer
riches. Such arrangements artificially made by the performance of penances
are considered to be in the mode of passion. The results are temporary; they
can be continued for some time, but they are not permanent.

TEXT 19

WWWWWWI
Wmﬁaiaamaamuﬁu

mﬁdha—grc‘thenc‘ttmano yat
pidayc‘t kriyate tapah
parasyotsc‘tdam‘trtham U67
tat tc‘tmasam udc‘thrtam

SYNONYMS

mﬁdha—foolish; grc‘thena—with endeavor; c‘ttmanah—of one’s own self;
yat—which; pidayc‘t—by torture; kriyate—is performed; tapah—penance;
parasya—to others; utsc‘tdana—artham—for the sake of causing annihilation;



vc‘t—or; tat—that; tc‘tmasam—in the mode of darkness; udc‘thrtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

Penance performed out of foolishness, with self-torture or to destroy or
injure others, is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

There are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like
Hiranyakas’ipu, who performed austere penances to become immortal and kill
the demigods. He prayed to Brahma for such things, but ultimately he was
killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To undergo penances for
something which is impossible is certainly in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 20

WWWSWU‘II
ﬁﬁmaqﬁammaﬁmmou

dc‘ttavyam iti yad dc‘mam
diyate ’nupakc‘trine
des’e kale ca pc‘ttre ca
tad danam sc‘tttvikam smrtam

SYNONYMS

datavyam—worth giving; iti—thus; yat—that which; dc‘mam—charity;
diyate—is given; anupakc'trine—irrespective of return; des’e—in a proper place;
kale—at a proper time; ca—also; pc‘ttre—to a suitable person; ca—and;
tat—that; dc‘mam—charity; sc‘tttvikam—in the mode of goodness; smrtam—is
considered.

TRANSLATION



Charity given out of duty, without expectation of return, at the proper time
and place, and to a worthy person is considered to be in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

In the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual
activities is recommended. There is no recommendation for giving charity
indiscriminately. Spiritual perfection is always a consideration. Therefore
charity is recommended to be given at a place of pilgrimage and at lunar or
solar eclipses or at the end of the month or to a qualified brc‘thmana or a
Vaisnava (devotee) or in temples. Such charities should be given without any
consideration of return. Charity to the poor is sometimes given out of
compassion, but if a poor man is not worth giving charity to, then there is no
spiritual advancement. In other words, indiscriminate charity is not
recommended in the Vedic literature.

TEXT 21

ﬁmﬁmﬁﬁwwl
WHWWWWIIQM

yat tu pratyupakc‘trdrtham
phalam uddis’ya U67 punah
diyate ca pariklistam
tad dc‘mam rc‘tjasam smrtam

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; tu—but; prati—upakdra—artham—for the sake of getting some
return; phalam—a result; uddis’ya—desiring; vc‘I—or; punah—again; diyate—is
given; ca—also; pariklistam—grudgingly; tat—that; dc‘mam—charity;
rc‘tjasam—in the mode of passion; smrtam—is understood to be.



TRANSLATION

But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a desire
for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to be charity in the mode of
passion.

PURPORT

Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom and
sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards: “Why have I
spent so much in this way?” Charity is also sometimes given under some
obligation, at the request of a superior. These kinds of charity are said to be
given in the mode of passion.

There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts to
institutions where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are not
recommended in the Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode of goodness is
recommended.

TEXT 22

WWQWI
WWIIQQII

ades’a-kc‘tle yad dc‘mam
apc‘ttrebhyas’ ca diyate
asat—krtam avajﬁdtam
tat tc‘tmasam udc‘thrtam

SYNONYMS

ades’a—at an unpurified place; kale—and unpurified time; yat—that which;
dc‘mam—charity; upc‘ttrebhyah—to unworthy persons; ca—also; diyate—is
given; asat—krtam—without respect; avajﬁc‘ttam—without proper attention;



tat—that; tc‘tmasam—in the mode of darkness; uddhrtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And charity performed at an impure place, at an improper time, to unworthy
persons, or without proper attention and respect is said to be in the mode of
ignorance.

PURPORT

Contributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not
encouraged here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance. Such
charity is not beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged. Similarly, if a
person gives charity to a suitable person but without respect and without
attention, that sort of charity is also said to be in the mode of darkness.

TEXT 23

$Wﬁﬁ‘3ﬁmﬁ3wﬁn
Wawawaﬁlﬁngﬂumu

om tat sad iti m'rdes’o
brahmanas tri—vidhah smrtah
brc‘thmanc‘ts tena vedc‘ts’ ca
yajﬁc‘ts’ ca vihitc‘th purc‘t

SYNONYMS

om—indication of the Supreme; tat—that; sat—eternal; iti—thus;
nirdes’ah—indication; brahmanah—of the Supreme; tri—vidhah—threefold;
smrtah—is considered; brc‘thmandh—the brahmanas; tena—with that;
vedah—the Vedic literature; ca—also; yajﬁc'th—sacrifice; ca—also;
Uihitc'th—used; purc‘t—formerly.



TRANSLATION

From the beginning of creation, the three words om tat sat were used to
indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth. These three symbolic representations
were used by brahmanas while chanting the hymns of the Vedas and during
sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Supreme.

PURPORT

It has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are divided
into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. But
whether first class, second class or third class, they are all conditioned,
contaminated by the material modes of nature. When they are aimed at the
Supreme—om tat sat, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternal—they
become means for spiritual elevation. In the scriptural injunctions such an
objective is indicated. These three words, om tat sat, particularly indicate the
Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the
word om is always found.

One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will not
attain the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, but not the
ultimate end of life. The conclusion is that the performance of charity,
sacrifice and penance must be done in the mode of goodness. Performed in the
mode of passion or ignorance, they are certainly inferior in quality. The three
words om tat sat are uttered in conjunction with the holy name of the Supreme
Lord, e.g., om tad Uisnoh. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the
Supreme Lord is uttered, om is added. This is the indication of Vedic
literature. These three words are taken from Vedic hymns. Om it§J etad
brahmano nedistham nc‘tma (Rg Veda) indicates the first goal. Then tat tvam asi
(Cbéndogya Upanigaa 6.8.7) indicates the second goal. And sad eva saumya
(Cbéndogya Upanigaa 6.2.1) indicates the third goal. Combined they become
om tat sat. Formerly when Brahma, the first created living entity, performed
sacrifices, he indicated by these three words the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore the same principle has always been followed by disciplic



succession. So this hymn has great significance. Bhagavad-gitc‘t recommends,
therefore, that any work done should be done for om tat sat, or for the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one performs penance, charity and
sacrifice with these three words, he is acting in Krsna consciousness. Krsna
consciousness is a scientific execution of transcendental activities which
enables one to return home, back to Godhead. There is no loss of energy in
acting in such a transcendental way.

TEXT 24

339133“: 33313833 33333311:sz
933% ﬁwﬁm: HEIEI 3mm" 38 ||

tasmc‘td om ity udc‘thrtya
yajﬁa—dc‘ma—tapah—kriyc‘th
pravartante vidhc‘moktc‘th
satatam brahma—vc‘tdim‘tm

SYNONYMS

tasmc‘It—therefore; om—beginning with om; iti—thus; udc‘thrtya—indicating;
yajﬁa—of sacrifice; dc'ma—charity; tapah—and penance;
kriyc‘Ih—performances; pravartcmte—begin; vidhc‘ma-uktc‘th—according to
scriptural regulation; satatam—always; brahma—vc‘tdim‘tm—of the
transcendentalists.

TRANSLATION

Therefore, transcendentalists undertaking performances of sacrifice, charity
and penance in accordance with scriptural regulations begin always with om, to
attain the Supreme.

PURPORT



Om tad Uisnoh paramam padam (Rg Veda 1.22.20). The lotus feet of Visnu
are the supreme devotional platform. The performance of everything on behalf
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead assures the perfection of all activity.

TEXT 25

3W tIo—cé 3333:8331: I
W59 13831: W 191W: || 39 ||

tad ity anabhisandhc‘tya
phalam yajﬁa—tapah—kriyc‘th

dc‘ma—kriyc‘ts’ ca vividhc‘th
kriycmte moksa—kc‘mksibhih

SYNONYMS

tat—that; iti—thus; anabhisandhc‘tya—without desiring; phalam—the fruitive
result; yajﬁa—of sacrifice; tapah—and penance; kriyc‘th—activities; dc'ma—of
charity; kriyc‘th—activities; ca—also; vividhc‘th—various; kriycmte—are done;
moksa-kc'mksibhih—by those who actually desire liberation.

TRANSLATION

Without desiring fruitive results, one should perform various kinds of
sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The purpose of such
transcendental activities is to get free from material entanglement.

PURPORT

To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any material
gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of being transferred to
the spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.



TEXTS 26—27

WWHWI
mmamawmafaaﬁuqsu
qﬁmﬁraﬁaﬁuﬁzaﬁzﬁrﬁaﬁl

ﬁﬁamaﬁaﬁﬁarfﬁaﬁaﬁuwu

sad—bhc‘we sc‘tdhu-bhc‘we ca
sad ity etat prayujyate
pras’aste karmani tathd

sac-chabdah pc‘trtha yujyate

yajﬁe tapasi dime ca

sthitih sad iti cocyate
karma caiva tad—arthiyam

sad ity evc‘tbhidhiyate

SYNONYMS

sat-bhc'we—in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sc'tdhu-bhc'we—in the
sense of the nature of the devotee; ca—also; sat—the word sat; iti—thus;
etat—this; prayujyate—is used; pras’aste—in bona fide; karmani—activities;
tathc‘I—also; sat—s’abdah—the sound sat; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; yujyate—is
used; yajﬁe—in sacrifice; tapasi—in penance; dc'me—in charity; ca—also;
sthitih—the situation; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; ca—and; ucyate—is
pronounced; karma—work; ca—also; eva—certainly; tat—for that;
arthiyam—meant; sat—the Supreme; iti—thus; eva—certainly; abhidhiyate—is
indicated.

TRANSLATION

The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is
indicated by the word sat. The performer of such sacrifice is also called sat, as
are all works of sacrifice, penance and charity which, true to the absolute



nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, 0 son of Prtha.

PURPORT

The words pras’aste karmani, or “prescribed duties,” indicate that there are
many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are purificatory
processes, beginning from the time of conception up to the end of one’s life.
Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the
living entity. In all such activities it is recommended that one Vibrate om tat
sat. The words sad—bhc‘we and sc‘tdhu—bhc‘we indicate the transcendental
situation. Acting in Krsna consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully
conscious of the activities of Krsna consciousness is called a $67th. In the
grimad-Bbégavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matter
becomes clear in the association of the devotees. The words used are satc'tm
prasahgc‘tt. Without good association, one cannot achieve transcendental
knowledge. When initiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one
vibrates the words om tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of performance of yajﬁa
the object is the Supreme, om tat sat. The word tad—arthiyam further means
offering serVice to anything which represents the Supreme, including such
serVice as cooking and helping in the Lord’s temple, or any other kind of work
for broadcasting the glories of the Lord. These supreme words om tat sat are
thus used in many ways to perfect all activities and make everything complete.

TEXT 28

aﬁmgﬁmﬁﬁaﬁI
Wméﬁaaeﬂaﬁeauwu

as’raddhayc‘t hutam dattam

tapas taptam krtam ca yat
asad ity ucyate pc‘trtha
ha ca tat pretya no iha



SYNONYMS

as’raddhayc‘t—without faith; hutam—offered in sacrifice; dattam—given;
tapah—penance; taptam—executed; krtam—performed; ca—also; yat—that
which; asat—false; iti—thus; ucyate—is said to be; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha;
na—never; ca—also; tat—that; pretya—after death; ha u—nor; iha—in this

life.

TRANSLATION

Anything done as sacrifice, charity or penance without faith in the Supreme,
0 son of Prtha, is impermanent. It is called asat and is useless both in this life
and the next.

PURPORT

Anything done without the transcendental objective—whether it be
sacrifice, charity or penance—is useless. Therefore in this verse it is declared
that such activities are abominable. Everything should be done for the
Supreme in Krsna consciousness. Without such faith, and without the proper
guidance, there can never be any fruit. In all the Vedic scriptures, faith in the
Supreme is advised. In the pursuit of all Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is
the understanding of Krsna. No one can obtain success without following this
principle. Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in
Krsna consciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. That is
the way to make everything successful.

In the conditional state, people are attracted to worshiping demigods,
ghosts, or Yaksas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than the modes
of passion and ignorance, but one who takes directly to Krsna consciousness is
transcendental to all three modes of material nature. Although there is a
process of gradual elevation, if one, by the association of pure devotees, takes
directly to Krsna consciousness, that is the best way. And that is recommended
in this chapter. To achieve success in this way, one must first find the proper



spiritual master and receive training under his direction. Then one can
achieve faith in the Supreme. When that faith matures, in course of time, it is
called love of God. This love is the ultimate goal of the living entities. One
should therefore take to Krsna consciousness directly. That is the message of
this Seventeenth Chapter.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventeenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divisions of Faith.

Conclusion—The Perfection of Renunciation

 

TEXT 1

WWI
WWWWI
WHWEWWMII

arjuna uvc‘tca
sannyc‘tsasya mahc‘t-bc‘tho
tattvam icchc‘tmi veditum
tyc‘tgasya ca hrsikes’a
prthak kes’i-nisﬁdana

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; sannyc‘tsasya—of renunciation; mahc‘I-bc‘tho—O
mighty-armed one; tattvam—the truth; icchc‘tmi—I wish; veditum—to



understand; tyc‘tgasya—of renunciation; ca—also; hrsikes’a—O master of the
senses; prthak—differently; kes’i—nisﬁdana—O killer of the Kes’i demon.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of
renunciation [tyaga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyasa], 0 killer of
the Kes‘i demon, master of the senses.

PURPORT

Actually the Bhagavad-gitc‘t is finished in seventeen chapters. The
Eighteenth Chapter is a supplementary summarization of the topics discussed
before. In every chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, Lord Krsna stresses that devotional
serVice unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the ultimate goal of life.
This same point is summarized in the Eighteenth Chapter as the most
confidential path of knowledge. In the first siX chapters, stress was given to
devotional service: yogim‘tm api sarvesc‘tm. .. “Of all yogis or transcendentalists,
one who always thinks of Me within himself is best.” In the next siX chapters,
pure devotional serVice and its nature and activity were discussed. In the third
siX chapters, knowledge, renunciation, the activities of material nature and
transcendental nature, and devotional serVice were described. It was
concluded that all acts should be performed in conjunction with the Supreme
Lord, represented by the words om tat sat, which indicate Visnu, the Supreme
Person. The third part of Bhagavad-gitc‘t has shown that devotional serVice, and
nothing else, is the ultimate purpose of life. This has been established by citing
past c‘tcc‘tryas and the Brahma-sﬁtra, the Vedc‘mta—sﬁtra. Certain impersonalists
consider themselves to have a monopoly on the knowledge of Vedc'mta-sﬁtm,
but actually the Vedc'mta-sﬁtm is meant for understanding devotional serVice,
for the Lord Himself is the composer of the Vedc'mta-sﬁtm and He is its
knower. That is described in the Fifteenth Chapter. In every scripture, every
Veda, devotional serVice is the objective. That is explained in Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

As in the Second Chapter a synopsis of the whole subject matter was
described, in the Eighteenth Chapter also the summary of all instruction is



given. The purpose of life is indicated to be renunciation and attainment of
the transcendental position above the three material modes of nature. Arjuna
wants to clarify the two distinct subject matters of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, namely
renunciation (tyc'tga) and the renounced order of life (sannyc'tsa). Thus he is
asking the meaning of these two words.

Two words used in this verse to address the Supreme Lord—Hrsikes’a and
Kes’i-nisudana—are significant. Hrsikes’a is Krsna, the master of all senses, who
can always help us attain mental serenity. Arjuna requests Him to summarize
everything in such a way that he can remain equipoised. Yet he has some
doubts, and doubts are always compared to demons. He therefore addresses
Krsna as Kes’i-nisudana. Kes’i was a most formidable demon who was killed by
the Lord; now Arjuna is expecting Krsna to kill the demon of doubt.

TEXT 2

WI
mmmmmm
WWWWWWNIQII

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca
kc‘tmyc‘mc‘tm karmanc‘tm nyasam
sannyc‘tsam kavayo viduh
sarva—karma—phala—tyc‘tgam
prc‘thus tyc‘tgam vicaksanc‘th

SYNONYMS

s’ri—bhagavc‘m uvc‘tca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said;
kc‘tmyc‘mc‘tm—with desire; karmanc‘tm—of activities; nyasam—renunciation;
sannyc‘tsam—the renounced order of life; kavayah—the learned; viduh—know;
sarva—of all; karma—activities; phala—of results; tyc‘tgam—renunciation;
prc‘thuh—call; tyc‘tgam—renunciation; vicaksanc‘th—the experienced.



TRANSLATION

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The giving up of activities that
are based on material desire is what great learned men call the renounced order
of life [sannyasa]. And giving up the results of all activities is what the wise call
renunciation [tyaga].

PURPORT

The performance of activities for results has to be given up. This is the
instruction of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. But activities leading to advanced spiritual
knowledge are not to be given up. This will be made clear in the next verses. In
the Vedic literature there are many prescriptions of methods for performing
sacrifice for some particular purpose. There are certain sacrifices to perform to
attain a good son or to attain elevation to the higher planets, but sacrifices
prompted by desires should be stopped. However, sacrifice for the purification
of one’s heart or for advancement in the spiritual science should not be given

up.

TEXT 3

WWﬁWﬁwu
Wzﬁaaafﬁrﬁrammu

tyc‘tjyam dosa-vad ity eke

karma prc‘thur manisinah

yajﬁa—dc‘ma-tapah—karma
ha tyc‘tjyam iti cc‘tpare

SYNONYMS

tyc‘tjyam—must be given up; dosa-vat—as an evil; iti—thus; eke—one group;
karma—work; prahuh—they say; manisinah—great thinkers; yajﬁa—of



sacrifice; dc'ma—charity; tapah—and penance; karma—works; na—never;
tyc‘tjyam—are to be given up; iti—thus; ca—and; apare—others.

TRANSLATION

Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should be given
up as faulty, yet other sages maintain that acts of sacrifice, charity and penance

should never be abandoned.

PURPORT

There are many activities in the Vedic literature which are subjects of
contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed in a sacrifice,
yet some maintain that animal killing is completely abominable. Although
animal killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedic literature, the animal
is not considered to be killed. The sacrifice is to give a new life to the animal.
Sometimes the animal is given a new animal life after being killed in the
sacrifice, and sometimes the animal is promoted immediately to the human
form of life. But there are different opinions among the sages. Some say that
animal killing should always be avoided, and others say that for a specific
sacrifice it is good. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are now

being clarified by the Lord Himself.

TEXT 4

ﬁaﬁmﬁmaﬂWI
mﬁmﬁﬁazmﬁazmu

nis’cayam s’mu me tatra
tyc‘tge bharata—sattama
tyc‘tgo hi purusa—vyc‘tghra

tri—Uidhah samprakirtitah



SYNONYMS

nis’cayam—certainty; s’mu—hear; me—from Me; tatra—therein; tyc‘tge—in the
matter of renunciation; bharata—sat-tama—O best of the Bharatas;
tyc‘tgah—renunciation; hi—certainly; purusa—vyc‘tghra—O tiger among human
beings; tri—vidhah—of three kinds; samprakirtitah—is declared.

TRANSLATION

0 best of the Bharatas, now hear My judgment about renunciation. O tiger
among men, renunciation is declared in the scriptures to be of three kinds.

PURPORT

Although there are differences of opinion about renunciation, here the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, gives His judgment, which should
be taken as final. After all, the Vedas are different laws given by the Lord.
Here the Lord is personally present, and His word should be taken as final.
The Lord says that the process of renunciation should be considered in terms
of the modes of material nature in which they are performed.

TEXT 5

Wzﬁqmmaam
aﬁmmﬁawﬁnﬁﬁmuau

yajﬁa—dc‘ma-tapah—karma
ha tydjyam kc‘tryam eva tat
yajﬁo dc‘mam tapas” caiva
pc‘wam‘mi manisinc‘tm

SYNONYMS

yajﬁa—of sacrifice; dc‘ma—charity; tapah—and penance; karma—activity;



na—never; tyc‘tjyam—to be given up; kc‘tryam—must be done; eva—certainly;
tat—that; yajﬁah—sacrifice; dc‘mam—charity; tapah—penance; ca—also;
eva—certainly; pc‘wanc‘mi—purifying; manisinc‘tm—even for the great souls.

TRANSLATION

Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up; they must be
performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great souls.

PURPORT

The yogis should perform acts for the advancement of human society. There
are many purificatory processes for advancing a human being to spiritual life.
The marriage ceremony, for example, is considered to be one of these
sacrifices. It is called vivaha—yajﬁa. Should a scmnyc‘tsi, who is in the renounced
order of life and who has given up his family relations, encourage the marriage
ceremony.7 The Lord says here that any sacrifice which is meant for human
welfare should never be given up. Vivaha-yajﬁa, the marriage ceremony, is
meant to regulate the human mind so that it may become peaceful for spiritual
advancement. For most men, this UiUt‘tha-yajﬁa should be encouraged even by
persons in the renounced order of life. Sannyc'tsis should never associate with
women, but that does not mean that one who is in the lower stages of life, a
young man, should not accept a wife in the marriage ceremony. All prescribed
sacrifices are meant for achieving the Supreme Lord. Therefore, in the lower
stages, they should not be given up. Similarly, charity is for the purification of
the heart. If charity is given to suitable persons, as described previously, it
leads one to advanced spiritual life.

TEXT 6

mﬁgﬁﬁw’aﬁwﬁal
Wﬁmﬁﬁfﬁnﬁwusu

etc‘my api tu karmani



sahgam tyaktvc‘t phalc‘mi ca
kartavyc‘miti me pc‘trtha
m's’citam matam uttamam

SYNONYMS

etc‘mi—all these; api—certainly; tu—but; karmani—activities;
sahgam—association; tyaktvc‘I—renouncing; phaldni—results; ca—also;
kartavyc‘mi—should be done as duty; iti—thus; me—My; pc‘trtha—O son of
Prtha; nis’citam—definite; matam—opinion; uttamam—the best.

TRANSLATION

All these activities should be performed without attachment or any
expectation of result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, 0 son of
Prtha. That is My final opinion.

PURPORT

Although all sacrifices are purifying, one should not expect any result by
such performances. In other words, all sacrifices which are meant for material
advancement in life should be given up, but sacrifices that purify one’s
existence and elevate one to the spiritual plane should not be stopped.
Everything that leads to Krsna consciousness must be encouraged. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is said that any activity which leads to devotional
serVice to the Lord should be accepted. That is the highest criterion of
religion. A devotee of the Lord should accept any kind of work, sacrifice or
charity which will help him in the discharge of devotional serVice to the Lord.

TEXT 7

Wam:$ﬁvﬁ=ﬁml
WW:WEIH:III9II



niyatasya tu scmnyc‘tsah

karmano nopapadyate

mohc‘tt tasya parityc‘tgas
tc‘tmasah parikirtitah

SYNONYMS

niyatasya—prescribed; tu—but; sannyc‘tsah—renunciation; karmanah—of
activities; na—never; upapadyate—is deserved; mohc‘tt—by illusion; tasya—of
them; parityc'tgah—renunciation; tc'tmasah—in the mode of ignorance;
parikirtitah—is declared.

TRANSLATION

Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If one gives up his prescribed
duties because of illusion, such renunciation is said to be in the mode of
ignorance.

PURPORT

Work for material satisfaction must be given up, but activities which
promote one to spiritual activity, like cooking for the Supreme Lord and
offering the food to the Lord and then accepting the food, are recommended.
It is said that a person in the renounced order of life should not cook for
himself. Cooking for oneself is prohibited, but cooking for the Supreme Lord is
not prohibited. Similarly, a scmnyc'tsi may perform a marriage ceremony to help
his disciple in the advancement of Krsna consciousness. If one renounces such
activities, it is to be understood that he is acting in the mode of darkness.

TEXT 8

gzaﬁﬁamml

Hmmmﬁaawmaﬁquw



duhkham ity eva yat karma
kc‘tya-kles’a—bhayc‘tt tyajet
sa krtvc‘t rc‘tjasam tyc‘tgam

naiva tyc‘tga—phalam labhet

SYNONYMS

duhkham—unhappy; iti—thus; eva—certainly; yat—which; karma—work;
kc‘tya—for the body; kles’a—trouble; bhayc‘tt—out of fear; tyajet—gives up;
sah—he; krtvc‘I—after doing; rc‘tjasam—in the mode of passion;
tyc‘tgam—renunciation; na—not; eva—certainly; tyc‘tga—of renunciation;
phalam—the results; labhet—gains.

TRANSLATION

Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome or out of fear of
bodily discomfort is said to have renounced in the mode of passion. Such action
never leads to the elevation of renunciation.

PURPORT

One who is in Krsna consciousness should not give up earning money out of
fear that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working one can engage his
money in Krsna consciousness, or if by rising early in the morning one can
advance his transcendental Krsna consciousness, one should not desist out of
fear or because such activities are considered troublesome. Such renunciation
is in the mode of passion. The result of passionate work is always miserable. If a
person renounces work in that spirit, he never gets the result of renunciation.

TEXT 9

Wﬁﬁaac—oﬁﬁﬁﬁmﬁm
ﬁaanqw’sﬁaaamzarﬁaﬁnazusu



kc‘tryam ity eva yat karma
niyatam kriyate ’rjuna
sahgam tyaktvc‘t phalam caiva
sa tyc‘tgah sc‘tttviko matah

SYNONYMS

kc‘tryam—it must be done; iti—thus; eva—indeed; yat—which; karma—work;
niyatam—prescribed; kriyate—is performed; arjuna—O Arjuna;
sahgam—association; tyaktvd—giving up; phalam—the result; ca—also;
eva—certainly; sah—that; tyc‘tgah—renunciation; sc‘tttvikah—in the mode of
goodness; matah—in My opinion.

TRANSLATION

O Arjuna, when one performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to
be done, and renounces all material association and all attachment to the fruit,
his renunciation is said to be in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Prescribed duties must be performed with this mentality. One should act
without attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from the modes
of work. A man working in Krsna consciousness in a factory does not associate
himself with the work of the factory, nor with the workers of the factory. He
simply works for Krsna. And when he gives up the result for Krsna, he is acting
transcendentally.

TEXT 10

Hmﬁwqﬁwﬁl
WWWW: || 9o II

ha dvesty akus’alam karma



kus’ale nc‘musajjate
tyc‘tgi sattva-samc‘wisto
medhc‘wi chinna—sams’ayah

SYNONYMS

na—never; dvesti—hates; akus’alam—inauspicious; karma—work; kus’ale—in
the auspicious; na—nor; anusajjate—becomes attached; tyc'tgi—the renouncer;
sattva—in goodness; samavistah—absorbed; medhc‘wi—intelligent;
chinna—having cut off; sams’ayah—all doubts.

TRANSLATION

The intelligent renouncer situated in the mode of goodness, neither hateful
of inauspicious work nor attached to auspicious work, has no doubts about
work.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not hate
anyone or anything which troubles his body. He does work in the proper place
and at the proper time without fearing the troublesome effects of his duty.
Such a person situated in transcendence should be understood to be most
intelligent and beyond all doubts in his activities.

TEXT 11

38331313333339sz
ﬁﬁWﬁﬁHwﬁaﬁaﬁuﬁuwu

ha hi deha—bhrtc‘t s’akyam
tyaktum karmany as’esatah
yas tu karma—phala-tyc‘tgi
sa tyc‘tgity abhidhiyate



SYNONYMS

na—never; hi—certainly; deha-bhrtc‘t—by the embodied; s’akyam—is possible;
tyaktum—to be renounced; karmani—activities; as’esatah—altogether;
yah—anyone who; tu—but; karma—of work; phala—of the result; tyc‘tgi—the
renouncer; sah—he; tyc'tgi—the renouncer; iti—thus; abhidhiyate—is said.

TRANSLATION

It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all activities. But he
who renounces the fruits of action is called one who has truly renounced.

PURPORT

It is said in Bhagavad-gitc‘t that one can never give up work at any time.
Therefore he who works for Krsna and does not enjoy the fruitive results, who
offers everything to Krsna, is actually a renouncer. There are many members
of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness who work very hard in
their office or in the factory or some other place, and whatever they earn they
give to the Society. Such highly elevated souls are actually scmnyc'tsis and are
situated in the renounced order of life. It is clearly outlined here how to
renounce the fruits of work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.

TEXT 12
aﬁeﬁéﬁéaﬁrﬁﬁﬁwmI
Wﬁmiﬁaﬁgwﬁmfaaﬁaunu

anistam istam mis’ram ca
tri—Uidham karmanah phalam

bhavaty atyc‘tgmc‘tm pretya

ha tu sannyc‘tsim‘tm kvacit



SYNONYMS

anistam—leading to hell; istam—leading to heaven; mis’ram—mixed; ca—and;
tri—vidham—of three kinds; karmanah—of work; phalam—the result;
bhavati—comes; atyc‘tgim‘tm—for those who are not renounced; pretya—after
death; na—not; tu—but; sannyc‘tsim‘tm—for the renounced order; kvacit—at
any time.

TRANSLATION

For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action—desirable,
undesirable and mixed—accrue after death. But those who are in the renounced
order of life have no such result to suffer or enjoy.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness acting in knowledge of his relationship
with Krsna is always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy or suffer
the results of his acts after death.

TEXT 13

WWWWﬁI
WWWWWMM

paﬁcaitc‘mi mahc‘t-bc‘tho

kc‘tranc‘mi nibodha me
sc‘mkhye krtc‘mte proktc‘mi
siddhaye sarva—karmanc‘tm

SYNONYMS

paﬁca—five; etc‘mi—these; mahc‘I-bc‘tho—O mighty-armed one;
kc‘tranc‘mi—causes; nibodha—just understand; me—from Me; sc‘mkhye—in the



Vedanta; krta—cmte—in the conclusion; proktc‘mi—said; siddhaye—for the
perfection; sarva—of all; karmanc‘tm—activities.

TRANSLATION

O mighty-armed Arjuna, according to the Vedanta there are five causes for
the accomplishment of all action. Now learn of these from Me.

PURPORT

A question may be raised that since any activity performed must have some
reaction, how is it that the person in Krsna consciousness does not suffer or
enjoy the reactions of work.7 The Lord is citing Vedc'mta philosophy to show
how this is possible. He says that there are five causes for all activities, and for
success in all activity one should consider these five causes. Sc'mkhya means the
stalk of knowledge, and Vedc'mta is the final stalk of knowledge accepted by all
leading c'tcc'tryas. Even Sankara accepts Vedc'mta-sﬁtm as such. Therefore such
authority should be consulted.

The ultimate control is invested in the Supersoul. As it is stated in the
Bhagavad—gitc‘t, sarvasya cc‘tham hrdi sannivistah. He is engaging everyone in
certain activities by reminding him of his past actions. And Krsna conscious
acts done under His direction from within yield no reaction, either in this life
or in the life after death.

TEXT 14

WHWWWEEWI
Wagqaﬁeraafﬁaﬁmu 98 ||

adhisthc‘mam tathd kartc‘t
karanam ca prthag—vidham

vividhc‘ts’ ca prthak cestc‘t
daivam caivc‘ttra paﬁcamam



SYNONYMS

adhisthc‘mam—the place; tathc‘t—also; kartc‘I—the worker;
karanam—instruments; ca—and; prthak—vidham—of different kinds;
UiUidht‘th—Various; ca—and; prthak—separate; cestc'th—the endeavors;
daivam—the Supreme; ca—also; eva—certainly; atra—here; paﬁcamam—the

fifth.

TRANSLATION

The place of action [the body], the performer, the various senses, the many
different kinds of endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul—these are the five
factors of action.

PURPORT

The word adhisthc‘mam refers to the body. The soul within the body is acting
to bring about the results of activity and is therefore known as kartc‘t, “the
doer.” That the soul is the knower and the doer is stated in the s’mti. Esa hi
drastc‘t srastc‘t (Pras’na Upam'gaa 4.9). It is also confirmed in the Vedc‘mta-sﬁtra
by the verses [270 ’ta eva (2.3.18) and [(3115 sﬁstrﬁrtbavattvﬁt (2.3.33). The
instruments of action are the senses, and by the senses the soul acts in various
ways. For each and every action there is a different endeavor. But all one’s
activities depend on the will of the Supersoul, who is seated within the heart
as a friend. The Supreme Lord is the supercause. Under these circumstances,
he who is acting in Krsna consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul
situated within the heart is naturally not bound by any activity. Those in
complete Krsna consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions.
Everything is dependent on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the Supreme

Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 15



WWWWH
mmmmqﬁﬁaﬁéaazuwu

s’arira-vc‘m-manobhir yat

karma prc‘trabhate narah

nyayyam U67 viparitam U67
paﬁcaite tasya hetavah

SYNONYMS

s’arira—by the body; vc‘tk—speech; manobhih—and mind; yat—which;
karma—work; prarabhate—begins; narah—a person; nyc‘tyyam—right; vc‘t—or;
viparitam—the opposite; vc‘t—or; paﬁca—five; ete—all these; tasya—its;
hetavah—causes.

TRANSLATION

Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech is
caused by these five factors.

PURPORT

The words “right” and “wrong” are very significant in this verse. Right work
is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in the scriptures, and wrong
work is work done against the principles of the scriptural injunctions. But
whatever is done requires these five factors for its complete performance.

TEXT 16
ﬁdaﬁrmmﬁam’squu
Wamﬁrgﬁﬁzmsu

tatraivam sati kartc‘tram
c‘ttmc‘mam kevalam tu yah



pas’yaty akrta—buddhitvc‘m
na sa pas’yati durmatih

SYNONYMS

tatra—there; evam—thus; sati—being; kartc‘tram—the worker;
c‘ttmc‘mam—himself; kevalam—only; tu—but; yah—anyone who; pas’yati—sees;
akrta—buddhitvc‘tt—due to unintelligence; na—never; sah—he; pas’yati—sees;
durmatih—foolish.

TRANSLATION

Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the five
factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things as they are.

PURPORT

A foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a friend
within and conducting his actions. Although the material causes are the place,
the worker, the endeavor and the senses, the final cause is the Supreme, the
Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should see not only the four material
causes but the supreme efficient cause as well. One who does not see the
Supreme thinks himself to be the doer.

TEXT 17

WWWWHWI
mﬁasﬁlﬁmﬁaﬁqﬁﬁmmﬁumu

yasya nc‘thahkrto bhc‘wo
buddhir yasya mt lipyate

hatvc‘tpi sa imt‘tl lokc‘m
ha hcmti ha nibadhyate



SYNONYMS

yasya—one whose; na—never; ahahkrtah—of false ego; bhc‘wah—nature;
buddhih—intelligence; yasya—one whose; na—never; lipyate—is attached;
hatvc‘I—killing; api—even; sah—he; imc‘m—this; lokc‘m—world; na—never;
hanti—kills; na—never; nibadhyate—becomes entangled.

TRANSLATION

One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled,
though he kills men in this world, does not kill. Nor is he bound by his actions.

PURPORT

In this verse the Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to fight arises
from false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action, but he did not
consider the supreme sanction within and without. If one does not know that a
supersanction is there, why should he act? But one who knows the instruments
of work, himself as the worker, and the Supreme Lord as the supreme
sanctioner is perfect in doing everything. Such a person is never in illusion.
Personal activity and responsibility arise from false ego and godlessness, or a
lack of Krsna consciousness. Anyone who is acting in Krsna consciousness
under the direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
even though killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever affected by the reaction of
such killing. When a soldier kills under the command of a superior officer, he
is not subject to be judged. But if a soldier kills on his own personal account,
then he is certainly judged by a court of law.

TEXT 18
Wﬁdqﬁamﬁrﬁmmml
Wﬁaﬁﬁﬁﬁuzmﬁzuwu



jﬁc‘mam jﬁeyam parijﬁc‘ttc‘t
tri—vidhc‘t karma-codanc‘t
karanam karma karteti
tri—vidhah karma-sahgrahah

SYNONYMS

jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; jﬁeyam—the objective of knowledge; parijﬁc‘ttc‘t—the
knower; tri—vidhc‘I—of three kinds; karma—of work; codcmc‘t—the impetus;
karanam—the senses; karma—the work; kartc‘I—the doer; iti—thus;
tri—vidhah—of three kinds; karma—of work; sahgrahah—the accumulation.

TRANSLATION

Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the three factors
that motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer are the three
constituents of action.

PURPORT

There are three kinds of impetus for daily work: knowledge, the object of
knowledge, and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itself and the
worker are called the constituents of work. Any work done by any human
being has these elements. Before one acts, there is some impetus, which is
called inspiration. Any solution arrived at before work is actualized is a subtle
form of work. Then work takes the form of action. First one has to undergo the
psychological processes of thinking, feeling and willing, and that is called
impetus. The inspiration to work is the same if it comes from the scripture or
from the instruction of the spiritual master. When the inspiration is there and
the worker is there, then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses,
including the mind, which is the center of all the senses. The sum total of all
the constituents of an activity are called the accumulation of work.

TEXT 19



aﬁmﬁaaﬁfaﬁﬁaﬂwﬁaau
MWHWWWIRII

jﬁc‘mam karma ca kartc‘t ca
tridhaiva guna—bhedatah

procyate guna—sahkhyc‘me
yathc‘wac chmu tc‘my api

SYNONYMS

jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; karma—work; ca—also; kartc‘I—worker; ca—also;
tridhc‘t—of three kinds; eva—certainly; guna—bhedatah—in terms of different
modes of material nature; procyate—are said; guna—sahkhyc‘me—in terms of
different modes; yathc't-Uat—as they are; s’mu—hear; tc'mi—all of them;
api—also.

TRANSLATION

According to the three different modes of material nature, there are three
kinds of knowledge, action and performer of action. Now hear of them from

Me.

PURPORT

In the Fourteenth Chapter the three divisions of the modes of material
nature were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that the mode of
goodness is illuminating, the mode of passion materialistic, and the mode of
ignorance conducive to laziness and indolence. All the modes of material
nature are binding; they are not sources of liberation. Even in the mode of
goodness one is conditioned. In the Seventeenth Chapter, the different types
of worship by different types of men in different modes of material nature
were described. In this verse, the Lord says that He wishes to speak about the
different types of knowledge, workers and work itself according to the three



material modes.

TEXT 20

Héﬁgﬁﬁﬁﬁﬂﬁaﬁl
WWWﬁﬁmﬁaﬁquu

sarva—bhﬁtesu yenaikam

bhc‘wam avyayam iksate

avibhaktam vibhaktesu
taj jﬁc‘mam viddhi sc‘tttvikam

SYNONYMS

sarva—bhﬁtesu—in all living entities; yena—by which; ekam—one;
bhc‘wam—situation; avyayam—imperishable; iksate—one sees;
avibhaktam—undivided; vibhaktesu—in the numberless divided; tat—that;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; Uiddhi—know; sc'tttvikam—in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all living
entities, though they are divided into innumerable forms, you should
understand to be in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

A person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a demigod,
human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possesses knowledge in the
mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spirit soul is there, although they
have different bodies in terms of their previous work. As described in the
Seventh Chapter, the manifestation of the living force in every body is due to
the superior nature of the Supreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature,
that living force, in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living



energy is imperishable, although the bodies are perishable. Differences are
perceived in terms of the body; because there are many forms of material
existence in conditional life, the living force appears to be divided. Such
impersonal knowledge is an aspect of self-realization.

TEXT 21

EWQWWWI
ﬁﬁﬁﬁgaﬁmﬁﬁimuvu

prthaktvena tu yaj jﬁc‘mam
nc‘mc‘I—bhc‘wc‘m prthag—Uidhc‘m
vetti sarvesu bhﬁtesu
taj jﬁc‘mam viddhi rc‘tjasam

SYNONYMS

prthaktvena—because of division; tu—but; yat—which; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
nc‘mc‘t—bhc‘wc‘m—multifarious situations; prthak—Uidhc‘m—different; vetti—knows;
sarvesu—in all; bhﬁtesu—living entities; tat—that; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge;
Uiddhi—must be known; Tajasam—in terms of passion.

TRANSLATION

That knowledge by which one sees that in every different body there is a
different type of living entity you should understand to be in the mode of
passion.

PURPORT

The concept that the material body is the living entity and that with the
destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed is called knowledge
in the mode of passion. According to that knowledge, bodies differ from one
another because of the development of different types of consciousness,



otherwise there is no separate soul which manifests consciousness. The body is
itself the soul, and there is no separate soul beyond the body. According to
such knowledge, consciousness is temporary. Or else there are no individual
souls, but there is an all-pervading soul, which is full of knowledge, and this
body is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this body there is
no special individual or supreme soul. All such conceptions are considered
products of the mode of passion.

TEXT 22

WWWWI
31361191313361 HWIIQQII

yat tu krtsna—vad ekasmin

kc‘trye saktam ahaitukam

atattvc‘trtha—vad alpam ca
tat tc‘tmasam udc‘thrtam

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; tu—but; krtsna-vat—as all in all; ekasmin—in one;
kc‘trye—work; saktam—attached; ahaitukam—without cause;
atattva—artha-vat—without knowledge of reality; alpam—very meager;
ca—and; tat—that; tc‘tmasam—in the mode of darkness; udc‘thrtam—is said to

be.

TRANSLATION

And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all
in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in
the mode of darkness.

PURPORT



The “knowledge” of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or
ignorance because every living entity in conditional life is born into the mode
of ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the authorities or
scriptural injunctions has knowledge that is limited to the body. He is not
concerned about acting in terms of the directions of scripture. For him God is
money, and knowledge means the satisfaction of bodily demands. Such
knowledge has no connection with the Absolute Truth. It is more or less like
the knowledge of the ordinary animals: the knowledge of eating, sleeping,
defending and mating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the
mode of darkness. In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyond
this body is called knowledge in the mode of goodness, knowledge producing
many theories and doctrines by dint of mundane logic and mental speculation
is the product of the mode of passion, and knowledge concerned only with
keeping the body comfortable is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 23

WWW:WI
Wﬁmﬁawﬁunu

niyatam sahga—rahitam
arc‘tga-dvesatah krtam

aphala-prepsunc‘t karma

yat tat sc‘tttvikam ucyate

SYNONYMS

niyatam—regulated; sahga—rahitam—without attachment;
arc‘tga—dvesatah—without love or hatred; krtam—done; aphala—prepsum‘t—by
one without desire for fruitive result; karma—action; yat—which; tat—that;
sc‘tttvikam—in the mode of goodness; ucyate—is called.



TRANSLATION

That action which is regulated and which is performed without attachment,
without love or hatred, and without desire for fruitive results is said to be in the
mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Regulated occupational duties, as prescribed in the scriptures in terms of
the different orders and divisions of society, performed without attachment or
proprietary rights and therefore without any love or hatred, and performed in
Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction of the Supreme, without
self-satisfaction or self-gratification, are called actions in the mode of
goodness.

TEXT 24

uﬁmﬁm§ﬁa133ﬁwa11=rzl
WWWIIQM

yat tu kdmepsunc‘t karma
sc‘thahkc‘trena v51 punah
kriyate bahulc‘tyc‘tsam
tad rc‘tjasam udc‘thrtam

SYNONYMS

yat—that which; tu—but; kdma—ipsum‘t—by one with desires for fruitive
results; karma—work; sa—ahahkc‘trena—with ego; vc‘I—or; punah—again;
kriyate—is performed; bahula—c‘tyc‘tsam—with great labor; tat—that;
rc‘tjasam—in the mode of passion; uddhrtam—is said to be.



TRANSLATION

But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his desires,
and enacted from a sense of false ego, is called action in the mode of passion.

TEXT 25

WNWHEWI
Wﬁmmwﬁuuu

anubandham ksayam himsc‘tm
cmapeksya ca paurusam
mohc‘td c‘trabhyate karma
yat tat tc‘tmasam ucyate

SYNONYMS

anubandham—of future bondage; ksayam—destruction; himsc‘Im—and distress
to others; cmapeksya—without considering the consequences; ca—also;
paurusam—self-sanctioned; mohc‘tt—by illusion; c‘trabhyate—is begun;
karma—work; yat—which; tat—that; tc‘tmasam—in the mode of ignorance;
ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

That action performed in illusion, in disregard of scriptural injunctions, and
without concern for future bondage or for Violence or distress caused to others
is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

One has to give account of one’s actions to the state or to the agents of the
Supreme Lord called the Yamadutas. Irresponsible work is destructive because



it destroys the regulative principles of scriptural injunction. It is often based
on Violence and is distressing to other living entities. Such irresponsible work
is carried out in the light of one’s personal experience. This is called illusion.
And all such illusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 26

11336131833313.1sz
W:WWWII 3311

mukta-sahgo ’naham—vc‘tdi
dhrty—utsc‘tha—samanvitah
siddhy—asiddhyor nirvikc‘trah
kartc‘t sc‘tttvika ucyate

SYNONYMS

mukta—sahgah—liberated from all material association; anaham—vc‘tdi—without
false ego; dhrti—with determination; utsc‘tha—and great enthusiasm;
samanvitah—qualified; siddhi—in perfection; asiddhyoh—and failure;
nirvikc‘trah—without change; kartc‘t—worker; sc‘tttvikah—in the mode of
goodness; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

One who performs his duty without association with the modes of material
nature, without false ego, with great determination and enthusiasm, and
without wavering in success or failure is said to be a worker in the mode of
goodness.

PURPORT

A person in Krsna consciousness is always transcendental to the material
modes of nature. He has no expectations for the result of the work entrusted to



him, because he is above false ego and pride. Still, he is always enthusiastic till
the completion of such work. He does not worry about the distress undertaken;
he is always enthusiastic. He does not care for success or failure; he is equal in
both distress and happiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 27

WWWWWRH
WWW EIEI‘éltt‘ilﬁaﬁﬁlﬁllQéll

rc‘tgi karma—phala-prepsur
lubdho himsc‘ttmako ’s’ucih
harsa—s’okc‘mvitah kartc‘t
rc‘tjasah parikirtitah

SYNONYMS

rc‘tgi—very much attached; karma—phala—the fruit of the work;
prepsuh—desiring; lubdhah—greedy; himsc‘I-c‘ttmakah—always envious;
as’ucih—unclean; harsa—s’oka—cmvitah—subject to joy and sorrow; kartc‘I—such a
worker; Tajasah—in the mode of passion; parikirtitah—is declared.

TRANSLATION

The worker who is attached to work and the fruits of work, desiring to enjoy
those fruits, and who is greedy, always envious, impure, and moved by joy and
sorrow, is said to be in the mode of passion.

PURPORT

A person is too much attached to a certain kind of work or to the result
because he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth and home, wife
and children. Such a person has no desire for higher elevation in life. He is
simply concerned with making this world as materially comfortable as possible.



He is generally very greedy, and he thinks that anything attained by him is
permanent and never to be lost. Such a person is envious of others and
prepared to do anything wrong for sense gratification. Therefore such a person
is unclean, and he does not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is
very happy if his work is successful and very much distressed when his work is
not successful. Such is the worker in the mode of passion.

TEXT 28

Wzmzasazslﬁﬁwgﬁﬁsmzl
WWHWWWIIFII

ayuktah prc‘tkrtah stabdhah
s’atho naiskrtiko ’lasah
visc‘tdi dirgha-sﬁtri ca
kartc‘t tc‘tmasa ucyate

SYNONYMS

ayuktah—not referring to the scriptural injunctions; prc‘tkrtah—materialistic;
stabdhah—obstinate; s’athah—deceitful; naiskrtikah—expert in insulting
others; alasah—lazy; visc‘tdi—morose; dirgha—sﬁtri—procrastinating; ca—also;
kartc‘I—worker; tc‘tmasah—in the mode of ignorance; ucyate—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

The worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions of the
scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expert in insulting
others, and who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating is said to be a worker
in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

In the scriptural injunctions we find what sort of work should be performed



and what sort of work should not be performed. Those who do not care for
those injunctions engage in work not to be done, and such persons are
generally materialistic. They work according to the modes of nature, not
according to the injunctions of the scripture. Such workers are not very gentle,
and generally they are always cunning and expert in insulting others. They are
very lazy; even though they have some duty, they do not do it properly, and
they put it aside to be done later on. Therefore they appear to be morose. They
procrastinate; anything which can be done in an hour they drag on for years.
Such workers are situated in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 29

Wuﬁﬁawﬁﬁuml
91311113113801

1111187—91’dF-E'I'QTI||12R||

buddher bhedam dhrtes’ caiva
gunatas tri—Uidham s’mu
procyamc‘mam as’esena
prthaktvena dhanaﬁjaya

SYNONYMS

buddheh—of intelligence; bhedam—the differences; dhrteh—of steadiness;
ca—also; eva—certainly; gunatah—by the modes of material nature;
tri—vidham—of three kinds; s’mu—just hear; procyamc‘mam—as described by
Me; as’esena—in detail; prthaktvena—differently; dhanaﬁjaya—O winner of
wealth.

TRANSLATION

0 winner of wealth, now please listen as I tell you in detail of the different
kinds of understanding and determination, according to the three modes of
material nature.



PURPORT

Now after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower,
in three different divisions according to the modes of material nature, the
Lord is explaining the intelligence and determination of the worker in the
same way.

TEXT 30

wﬁaﬁqﬁamﬁsﬁwﬁI
Wﬁﬁamaﬁrgﬁzmmﬁmu 3o II

pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
kc‘tryc‘tkc‘trye bhayc‘tbhaye
bandham moksam ca yc‘t vetti
buddhih $67 pc‘trtha sc‘tttviki

SYNONYMS

pravrttim—doing; ca—also; nivrttim—not doing; ca—and; kdrya—what ought
to be done; akc‘wye—and what ought not to be done; bhaya—fear; abhaye—and
fearlessness; bandham—bondage; moksam—liberation; ca—and; yc‘t—that
which; vetti—knows; buddhih—understanding; sc't—that; pc‘trtha—O son of
Prtha; sc'tttviki—in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be
done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is not to be
feared, what is binding and what is liberating, is in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT



Performing actions in terms of the directions of the scriptures is called
pravrtti, or executing actions that deserve to be performed. And actions which
are not so directed are not to be performed. One who does not know the
scriptural directions becomes entangled in the actions and reactions of work.
Understanding which discriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of
goodness.

TEXT 31

wuﬁnuﬁamameﬁaal
313313393113183’8’4111112131318‘1113911

yayc‘t dharmam adharmam ca
kc‘tryam cc‘tkc‘tryam eva ca
ayathc‘wat prajc‘mc‘tti
buddhih $67 pc‘trtha rc‘tjasi

SYNONYMS

yayc‘I—by which; dharmam—the principles of religion; adharmam—irreligion;
ca—and; kc‘tryam—what ought to be done; ca—also; akt‘tryam—what ought
not to be done; eva—certainly; ca—also; ayathc‘I—vat—imperfectly;
prajc‘mc‘tti—knows; buddhih—intelligence; sc‘I—that; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha;
Tajasi—in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, that understanding which cannot distinguish between
religion and irreligion, between action that should be done and action that
should not be done, is in the mode of passion.

TEXT 32



WWWWWI
aafafﬁaqﬁafaqlﬁzmmfmna‘luau

adharmam dharmam iti yc‘t
manyate tamasc‘wrtc‘t
sarvc‘trthc‘m viparitc‘tms’ ca
buddhih $67 pc‘trtha tc‘tmasi

SYNONYMS

adharmam—irreligion; dharmam—religion; iti—thus; yc‘t—which;
manyate—thinks; tamasc‘I—by illusion; c‘wrtc‘I—covered; sarva—arthc‘m—all
things; viparitc'm—in the wrong direction; ca—also; buddhih—intelligence;
sc't—that; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; tc'tmasi—in the mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and religion to
be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness, and strives always in the
wrong direction, 0 Partha, is in the mode of ignorance.

PURPORT

Intelligence in the mode of ignorance is always working the opposite of the
way it should. It accepts religions which are not actually religions and rejects
actual religion. Men in ignorance understand a great soul to be a common man
and accept a common man as a great soul. They think truth to be untruth and
accept untruth as truth. In all activities they simply take the wrong path;
therefore their intelligence is in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 33

91311me:sz



Wﬁzmmﬁmﬁaﬁu 33 ||

dhrtyc‘t yayc‘t dhc‘trayate
manah-prc‘mendriya—kriyc‘th
yogenc‘wyabhicc‘trinyc‘t
dhrtih $67 pc‘trtha sc‘tttviki

SYNONYMS

dhrtyc‘I—determination; yayc‘I—by which; dhc‘trayate—one sustains; manah—of
the mind; prc‘ma—life; indriya—and senses; kriyc‘Ih—the activities; yogena—by
yoga practice; avyabhicc‘trinyc‘t—without any break; dhrtih—determination;
sc't—that; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; sc'tttviki—in the mode of goodness.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained
with steadfastness by yoga practice, and which thus controls the activities of the
mind, life and senses is determination in the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

Yoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily fixed
in the Supreme Soul with determination, concentrating one’s mind, life and
sensory activities on the Supreme, engages in Krsna consciousness. That sort
of determination is in the mode of goodness. The word avyabhicc‘trinyc‘t is very
significant, for it indicates that persons who are engaged in Krsna
consciousness are never deviated by any other activity.

TEXT 34

wguﬁmmaﬁwumﬁsa‘ﬁl
WWqﬁszm" 38 ||



yayc‘t tu dharma—kc‘tmc‘trthc‘m
dhrtyc‘t dhc‘trayate ’rjuna
prascmgena phalakc‘mksi
dhrtih $67 pc‘trtha rc‘tjasi

SYNONYMS

yayc‘I—by which; tu—but; dharma—religiosity; kc‘tma—sense gratification;
arthc‘m—and economic development; dhrtyc't—by determination;
dhc‘trayate—one sustains; arjuna—O Arjuna; prasahgena—because of
attachment; phala-c‘tkc'mksi—desiring fruitive results; dhrtih—determination;
sc't—that; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; Tajasi—in the mode of passion.

TRANSLATION

But that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in religion,
economic development and sense gratification is of the nature of passion, O
Arjuna.

PURPORT

Any person who is always desirous of fruitive results in religious or
economic activities, whose only desire is sense gratification, and whose mind,
life and senses are thus engaged is in the mode of passion.

TEXT 35
wmwwﬁqﬁﬁaﬁam
3811131313'3319113231111191311131‘1113911

yayc‘t svapnam bhayam s’okam
visc‘tdam madam eva ca
1161 vimuﬁcati durmedhc‘t
dhrtih $67 pc‘trtha tc‘tmasi



SYNONYMS

yayc‘I—by which; svapnam—dreaming; bhayam—fearfulness;
s’okam—lamentation; visc‘tdam—moroseness; madam—illusion; eva—certainly;
ca—also; na—never; vimuﬁcati—one gives up; durmedhc‘t—unintelligent;
dhrtih—determination; sc‘I—that; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha; tc‘tmasi—in the
mode of ignorance.

TRANSLATION

And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness,
lamentation, moroseness and illusion—such unintelligent determination, 0 son
of Prtha, is in the mode of darkness.

PURPORT

It should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does not
dream. Here “dream” means too much sleep. Dreaming is always present; either
in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, dreaming is a natural
occurrence. But those who cannot avoid oversleeping, who cannot avoid the
pride of enjoying material objects, who are always dreaming of lording it over
the material world, and whose life, mind and senses are thus engaged, are
considered to have determination in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 36

QﬁﬁaEFﬁﬁﬁﬁmﬁWI
Wagzmamﬁru3su

sukham tv idc‘mim tri—Uidham
s’mu me bharatarsabha
abhyc‘tsc‘td ramate yatra
duhkhc‘mtam ca nigacchati



SYNONYMS

sukham—happiness; tu—but; idc‘mim—now; tri—vidham—of three kinds;
s’mu—hear; me—from Me; bharata—Tsabha—O best amongst the Bharatas;
abhyc‘tsc‘tt—by practice; ramate—one enjoys; yatra—where; duhkha—of
distress; antam—the end; ca—also; nigacchati—gains.

TRANSLATION

0 best of the Bharatas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds of
happiness by which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he sometimes
comes to the end of all distress.

PURPORT

A conditioned soul tries to enjoy material happiness again and again. Thus
he chews the chewed. But sometimes, in the course of such enjoyment, he
becomes relieved from material entanglement by association with a great soul.
In other words, a conditioned soul is always engaged in some type of sense
gratification, but when he understands by good association that it is only a
repetition of the same thing, and he is awakened to his real Krsna
consciousness, he is sometimes relieved from such repetitive so-called
happiness.

TEXT 37

WWWSWI
61311161 311% WM 319 ||

yat tad agre visam iva
parinc‘tme ’mrtopamam
tat sukham sc‘tttvikam proktam
c‘ttma—buddhi—prasdda—jam



SYNONYMS

yat—which; tat—that; agre—in the beginning; visam iva—like poison;
parinc‘tme—at the end; amrta—nectar; upamam—compared to; tat—that;
sukham—happiness; sc‘tttvikam—in the mode of goodness; proktam—is said;
c‘ttma—in the self; buddhi—of intelligence; prasc‘tda—jam—born of the
satisfaction.

TRANSLATION

That which in the beginning may be just like poison but at the end is just
like nectar and which awakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in
the mode of goodness.

PURPORT

In the pursuit of self-realization, one has to follow many rules and
regulations to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate the mind on
the self. All these procedures are very difficult, bitter like poison, but if one is
successful in following the regulations and comes to the transcendental
position, he begins to drink real nectar, and he enjoys life.

TEXT 38

WSW I
1113011191 1316113131 31313113 313131 813F111 3= II
visayendriya—samyogc‘td
yat tad agre ’mrtopamam

parinc‘tme visam iva
tat sukham rc‘tjasam smrtam

SYNONYMS



Visaya—of the objects of the senses; indriya—and the senses; samyogc‘tt—from
the combination; yat—which; tat—that; agTe—in the beginning;
amrta—upamam—just like nectar; parinc‘tme—at the end; visam iva—like
poison; tat—that; sukham—happiness; rc‘tjasam—in the mode of passion;
smrtam—is considered.

TRANSLATION

That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their objects
and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end is said to be of the
nature of passion.

PURPORT

A young man and a young woman meet, and the senses drive the young
man to see her, to touch her and to have sexual intercourse. In the beginning
this may be very pleasing to the senses, but at the end, or after some time, it
becomes just like poison. They are separated or there is divorce, there is
lamentation, there is sorrow, etc. Such happiness is always in the mode of
passion. Happiness derived from a combination of the senses and the sense
objects is always a cause of distress and should be avoided by all means.

TEXT 39

WWHQE‘WH
'331113111313311113911

yad agre cc‘mubcmdhe ca
sukham mohcmam dtmanah
nidrc‘tlasya—pramc‘tdottham
tat tc‘tmasam udc‘thrtam

SYNONYMS



yat—that which; agre—in the beginning; ca—also; anubcmdhe—at the end;
ca—also; sukham—happiness; mohanam—illusory; c‘ttmcmah—of the self;
nidrc‘t—sleep; c‘tlasya—laziness; pramc‘tda—and illusion; uttham—produced of;
tat—that; tc‘tmasam—in the mode of ignorance; udc‘thrtam—is said to be.

TRANSLATION

And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from
beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to be
of the nature of ignorance.

PURPORT

One who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the mode of
darkness, ignorance, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to act is
also in the mode of ignorance. For the person in the mode of ignorance,
everything is illusion. There is no happiness either in the beginning or at the
end. For the person in the mode of passion there might be some kind of
ephemeral happiness in the beginning and at the end distress, but for the
person in the mode of ignorance there is only distress both in the beginning
and at the end.

TEXT 40

=1 3131331 11313111 311 131131 33131 611 11:1: I
WWW: 13111391811113: || 8o ||
1161 tad asti prthivyc‘tm v51
divi devesu v51 punah

sattvam prakrti—jair muktam
yad ebhih syc‘tt tribhir gunaih

SYNONYMS



na—not; tat—that; asti—there is; prthivyc‘tm—on the earth; vc‘I—or; divi—in
the higher planetary system; devesu—amongst the demigods; UCT—OI‘;
punah—again; sattvam—existence; prakrti—jaih—born of material nature;
muktam—liberated; yat—that; ebhih—from the influence of these; syc‘It—is;
tribhih—three; gunaih—modes of material nature.

TRANSLATION

There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher
planetary systems, which is freed from these three modes born of material
nature.

PURPORT

The Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of
material nature all over the universe.

TEXT 41
311310191131311313111131101131113-311
WWW: || 89 ||

brahmana—ksatriya-vis’c‘tm
s’ﬁdrc‘mc‘tm ca parantapa
karmani pravibhaktc‘mi
svabhc‘wa—prabhavair gunaih

SYNONYMS

brc‘thmana—of the brahmanas; ksatriya—the ksatriyas; vis’c‘Im—and the
vais’yas; s’ﬁdrc‘mc‘tm—of the s’ﬁdras; ca—and; parantapa—O subduer of the
enemies; karmani—the activities; pravibhaktc‘mi—are divided; svabhc‘wa—their
own nature; prabhavaih—born of; gunaih—by the modes of material nature.



TRANSLATION

Brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sﬁdras are distinguished by the qualities
born of their own natures in accordance with the material modes, 0 chastiser of
the enemy.

TEXT 42

aﬁquﬁa‘mwmﬁam
aﬁﬁamﬁaaﬁamquu

s’amo damas tapah s’aucam
ksc‘mtir c‘trjavam eva ca
jﬁc‘mam Uijﬁc‘mam c‘tstikyam
brahma—karma svabhc‘wa—jam

SYNONYMS

s’amah—peacefulness; damah—self-control; tapah—austerity; s’aucam—purity;
ksc‘mtih—tolerance; c‘trjavam—honesty; eva—certainly; ca—and;
jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; Uijﬁc‘mam—wisdom; c‘tstikyam—religiousness; brahma—of
a brc‘thmana; karma—duty; svabhc‘wa—jam—born of his own nature.

TRANSLATION

Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, knowledge,
wisdom and religiousness—these are the natural qualities by which the
brahmanas work.

TEXT 43

ﬁﬁqﬁatﬁqﬁml



31311131311331 3131 613:1 1311113131111 83 II

s’auryam tejo dhrtir daksyam
yuddhe cc‘tpy apalc‘tyanam
dc‘mam is’vara—bhc‘was’ ca

ksc‘ttram karma svabhc‘wa—jam

SYNONYMS

s’auryam—heroism; tejah—power; dhrtih—determination;
daksyam—resourcefulness; yuddhe—in battle; ca—and; api—also;
apalc‘tyanam—not fleeing; dc‘mam—generosity; is’vara—of leadership;
bhc‘wah—the nature; ca—and; ksc‘ttram—of a ksatriya; karma—duty;
svabhc‘wa—jam—born of his own nature.

TRANSLATION

Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle,
generosity and leadership are the natural qualities of work for the ksatriyas.

TEXT 44

WWWWWI
Wﬁwﬁmu 88 ||

krsi—go—raksya—vc‘mijyam
vais’ya—karma svabhc‘wa—jam

paricaryc‘ttmakam karma

s’ﬁdrasyc‘tpi svabhc‘wa-jam

SYNONYMS

krsi—plowing; go—of cows; raksya—protection; vc‘mijyam—trade; vais’ya—of a
vais’ya; karma—duty; svabhc‘wa-jam—born of his own nature;



paricaryc‘t—service; c‘ttmakam—consisting of; karma—duty; s’ﬁdrasya—of the
s’ﬁdra; api—also; svabhc‘wa—jam—born of his own nature.

TRANSLATION

Farming, cow protection and business are the natural work for the vaisyas,
and for the sﬁdras there is labor and service to others.

TEXT 45

ﬁﬁﬁwﬁmzaﬁﬁwﬁmzl
aﬁﬁaﬁﬁamﬁaﬁaagquwu

sue sue karmany abhiratah

samsiddhim labhate narah

sva—karma-niratah siddhim
yathc‘t vindati tac chmu

SYNONYMS

sue sve—each his own; karmani—work; abhiratah—following;
samsiddhim—perfection; labhate—achieves; narah—a man; sva—karma—in his
own duty; m'ratah—engaged; siddhim—perfection; yathc‘I—as; vindati—attains;
tat—that; s’mu—listen.

TRANSLATION

By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now
please hear from Me how this can be done.

TEXT 46

aazuqﬁniamfaﬁa'ofﬁa'aam



WWWWWNWSII

yatah pravrttir thZtc‘mc‘Im

yena sarvam idam tatam
sva—karmanc‘t tam abhyarcya

siddhim vindati mc‘mavah

SYNONYMS

yatah—from whom; pravrttih—the emanation; thZtc‘mc‘Im—of all living
entities; yena—by whom; sarvam—all; idam—this; tatam—is pervaded;
sva—karmanc‘t—by his own duties; tam—Him; abhyarcya—by worshiping;
siddhim—perfection; vindati—achieves; mc‘mavah—a man.

TRANSLATION

By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is
all-pervading, a man can attain perfection through performing his own work.

PURPORT

As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all living beings are fragmental parts
and parcels of the Supreme Lord. Thus the Supreme Lord is the beginning of
all living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedc‘mta—sﬁtra—janmc‘tdy asya yatah
[SB 1.1.1]. The Supreme Lord is therefore the beginning of life of every living
entity. And as stated in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the Supreme
Lord, by His two energies, His external energy and internal energy, is
all-pervading. Therefore one should worship the Supreme Lord with His
energies. Generally the Vaisnava devotees worship the Supreme Lord with His
internal energy. His external energy is a perverted reﬂection of the internal
energy. The external energy is a background, but the Supreme Lord by the
expansion of His plenary portion as Paramatma is situated everywhere. He is
the Supersoul of all demigods, all human beings, all animals, everywhere. One
should therefore know that as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord one has his



duty to render serVice unto the Supreme. Everyone should be engaged in
devotional serVice to the Lord in full Krsna consciousness. That is
recommended in this verse.

Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type of occupation
by Hrsikes’a, the master of the senses. And by the result of the work in which
one is engaged, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, should be
worshiped. If one thinks always in this way, in full Krsna consciousness, then,
by the grace of the Lord, he becomes fully aware of everything. That is the
perfection of life. The Lord says in Bbagavad—gité (12.7), tesc'tm aham
samuddhartc‘t. The Supreme Lord Himself takes charge of delivering such a
devotee. That is the highest perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may
be engaged, if he serves the Supreme Lord he will achieve the highest
perfection.

TEXT 47

WW:W1FEEI§HFLI
Wﬁﬁaﬁrﬁrmumu

s’reyc‘m sva—dharmo vigunah

para-dharmc‘tt sv—cmusthitc‘tt
svabhc‘wa—niyatam karma
kurvcm nc‘tpnoti kilbisam

SYNONYMS

s’reyc‘m—better; sva—dharmah—one’s own occupation; vigunah—imperfectly
performed; para-dharmc‘tt—than another’s occupation;
su—anusthitc‘tt—perfectly done; svabhc‘wa-niyatam—prescribed according to
one’s nature; karma—work; kurvan—performing; na—never;
c'tpnoti—achieves; kilbisam—sinful reactions.

TRANSLATION



It is better to engage in one’s own occupation, even though one may perform
it imperfectly, than to accept another’s occupation and perform it perfectly.
Duties prescribed according to one’s nature are never affected by sinful
reactions.

PURPORT

One’s occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gitc‘t. As already discussed
in previous verses, the duties of a brdhmana, ksatriya, vais’ya and 33de are
prescribed according to their particular modes of nature. One should not
imitate another’s duty. A man who is by nature attracted to the kind of work
done by s’ﬁdras should not artificially claim to be a brc‘thmana, although he may
have been born into a brc‘thmana family. In this way one should work according
to his own nature; no work is abominable, if performed in the serVice of the
Supreme Lord. The occupational duty of a brc‘thmana is certainly in the mode
of goodness, but if a person is not by nature in the mode of goodness, he should
not imitate the occupational duty of a brdhmana. For a ksatriya, or
administrator, there are so many abominable things; a ksatriya has to be
Violent to kill his enemies, and sometimes a ksatriya has to tell lies for the sake
of diplomacy. Such Violence and duplicity accompany political affairs, but a
ksatriya is not supposed to give up his occupational duty and try to perform the
duties of a brdhmana.

One should act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. For example, Arjuna was a
ksatriya. He was hesitating to fight the other party. But if such fighting is
performed for the sake of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there
need be no fear of degradation. In the business field also, sometimes a
merchant has to tell so many lies to make a profit. If he does not do so, there
can be no profit. Sometimes a merchant says, “Oh, my dear customer, for you I
am making no profit,” but one should know that without profit the merchant
cannot exist. Therefore it should be taken as a simple lie if a merchant says
that he is not making a profit. But the merchant should not think that because
he is engaged in an occupation in which the telling of lies is compulsory, he
should give up his profession and pursue the profession of a brc‘thmana. That is



not recommended. Whether one is a ksatriya, a vais’ya, or a 33de doesn’t
matter, if he serves, by his work, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even
brc‘thmanas, who perform different types of sacrifice, sometimes must kill
animals because sometimes animals are sacrificed in such ceremonies.
Similarly, if a ksatriya engaged in his own occupation kills an enemy, there is
no sin incurred. In the Third Chapter these matters have been clearly and
elaborately explained; every man should work for the purpose of Yajﬁa, or for
Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anything done for personal sense
gratification is a cause of bondage. The conclusion is that everyone should be
engaged according to the particular mode of nature he has acquired, and he
should decide to work only to serve the supreme cause of the Supreme Lord.

TEXT 48

Wﬁﬁﬁaaﬁwﬁﬁa—éﬁl
Wﬁﬁﬁwmzuwu

saha-jam karma kaunteya
sa—dosam api 11a tyajet
sarvc‘trambhc‘t hi dosena
dhﬁmenc‘tgnir ivc‘wrtc‘th

SYNONYMS

saha—jam—born simultaneously; karma—work; kaunteya—O son of Kunti;
sa—dosam—with fault; api—although; na—never; tyajet—one should give up;
sarva—c‘trambhc‘th—all ventures; hi—certainly; dosena—with fault;
dhﬁmena—with smoke; agnih—fire; iva—as; c‘wrtc‘th—covered.

TRANSLATION

Every endeavor is covered by some fault, just as fire is covered by smoke.
Therefore one should not give up the work born of his nature, 0 son of Kunti,
even if such work is full of fault.



PURPORT

In conditioned life, all work is contaminated by the material modes of
nature. Even if one is a brc‘thmana, he has to perform sacrifices in which animal
killing is necessary. Similarly, a ksatriya, however pious he may be, has to fight
enemies. He cannot avoid it. Similarly, a merchant, however pious he may be,
must sometimes hide his profit to stay in business, or he may sometimes have to
do business on the black market. These things are necessary; one cannot avoid
them. Similarly, even though a man is a 33de serving a bad master, he has to
carry out the order of the master, even though it should not be done. Despite
these ﬂaws, one should continue to carry out his prescribed duties, for they are
born out of his own nature.

A very nice example is given herein. Although fire is pure, still there is
smoke. Yet smoke does not make the fire impure. Even though there is smoke
in the fire, fire is still considered to be the purest of all elements. If one prefers
to give up the work of a ksatriya and take up the occupation of a brc‘thmana, he
is not assured that in the occupation of a brc‘thmana there are no unpleasant
duties. One may then conclude that in the material world no one can be
completely free from the contamination of material nature. This example of
fire and smoke is very appropriate in this connection. When in wintertime one
takes a stone from the fire, sometimes smoke disturbs the eyes and other parts
of the body, but still one must make use of the fire despite disturbing
conditions. Similarly, one should not give up his natural occupation because
there are some disturbing elements. Rather, one should be determined to serve
the Supreme Lord by his occupational duty in Krsna consciousness. That is the
perfectional point. When a particular type of occupation is performed for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Lord, all the defects in that particular occupation
are purified. When the results of work are purified, when connected with
devotional serVice, one becomes perfect in seeing the self within, and that is
self-realization.

TEXT 49



Wzaéaﬁammn
WWWWMQII

asakta-buddhih sarvatra
jitc‘ttmc‘t vigata—sprhah
naiskarmya—siddhim paramam
sannyc‘tsem‘tdhigacchati

SYNONYMS

asakta—buddhih—having unattached intelligence; sarvatra—everywhere;
jita-c‘ttmc‘I—having control of the mind; Uigata—sprhah—without material
desires; naiskarmya—siddhim—the perfection of nonreaction;
paramam—supreme; sannyc‘tsena—by the renounced order of life;
adhigacchati—one attains.

TRANSLATION

One who is self-controlled and unattached and who disregards all material
enjoyments can obtain, by practice of renunciation, the highest perfect stage of
freedom from reaction.

PURPORT

Real renunciation means that one should always think himself part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord and therefore think that he has no right to enjoy
the results of his work. Since he is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, the
results of his work must be enjoyed by the Supreme Lord. This is actually
Krsna consciousness. The person acting in Krsna consciousness is really a
scmnyc'tsi, one in the renounced order of life. By such a mentality, one is
satisfied because he is actually acting for the Supreme. Thus he is not attached
to anything material; he becomes accustomed to not taking pleasure in
anything beyond the transcendental happiness derived from the serVice of the
Lord. A sannyc'tsi is supposed to be free from the reactions of his past activities,



but a person who is in Krsna consciousness automatically attains this
perfection without even accepting the so-called order of renunciation. This
state of mind is called yogc'tmdha, or the perfectional stage of yoga. As
confirmed in the Third Chapter, yas t1) c‘ttma—ratir eva syc‘tt: one who is satisfied
in himself has no fear of any kind of reaction from his activity.

TEXT 50

ﬁﬁmﬁrﬁrmaaaarﬁﬁﬁémﬁl
anréﬁaﬁéuﬁmammwuxou

siddhim prc‘tpto yathc‘t brahma
tathc‘tpnoti nibodha me
samasenaiva kaunteya
nisthc‘t jﬁc‘masya yc‘t para

SYNONYMS

siddhim—perfection; prc‘tptah—achieving; yathc‘I—as; brahma—the Supreme;
tathc't—so; c'tpnoti—one achieves; nibodha—try to understand; me—from Me;
same‘tsena—summarily; eva—certainly; kaunteya—O son of Kunti; nisthc‘I—the
stage; jﬁc‘masya—of knowledge; yc't—which; parc‘t—transcendental.

TRANSLATION

0 son of Kunti, learn from Me how one who has achieved this perfection
can attain to the supreme perfectional stage, Brahman, the stage of highest
knowledge, by acting in the way I shall now summarize.

PURPORT

The Lord describes for Arjuna how one can achieve the highest
perfectional stage simply by being engaged in his occupational duty,
performing that duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One attains the



supreme stage of Brahman simply by renouncing the result of his work for the
satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. That is the process of self-realization. The
actual perfection of knowledge is in attaining pure Krsna consciousness; that is
described in the following verses.

TEXTS 51—53

wﬁwqﬁwmm
' 21789313813112911
WWW”
WWWW: || 9311
WWﬁmmmI
marﬁﬁqzmwwwﬁumu

buddhyc‘t vis’uddhayc‘t yukto

dhrtyc‘ttmc‘mam niyamya ca

s’abdc‘tdin visayc‘tms tyaktvc‘t
rc‘tga-dvesau vyudasya ca

vivikta—sevi laghv-c‘ts’i
yata-vc‘tk-kc‘tya—mc‘masah
dhyc‘ma—yoga—paro nityam
vairc‘tgyam samupc‘ts’ritah

ahahkc‘tram balam darpam
kamam krodham parigraham
vimucya nirmamah s’c‘mto
brahma—bhﬁyc‘tya kalpate

SYNONYMS

buddhyc‘t—with the intelligence; vis’uddhayc‘t—fully purified; yuktah—engaged;
dhrtyc‘t—by determination; c‘ttmc‘mam—the self; niyamya—regulating; ca—also;
s’abda—c‘tdin—such as sound; visayc‘m—the sense objects; tyaktvd—giving up;



rc‘tga—attachment; dvesau—and hatred; vyudasya—laying aside; ca—also;
vivikta-sevi—living in a secluded place; laghu-c‘ts’i—eating a small quantity;
yata—having controlled; vc‘tk—speech; kc‘tya—body; mc‘masah—and mind;
dhyc‘ma—yoga—parah—absorbed in trance; nityam—twenty-four hours a day;
vairc‘tgyam—detachment; samupc‘ts’ritah—having taken shelter of;
ahahkc‘tram—false ego; balam—false strength; darpam—false pride;
kc‘tmam—lust; krodham—anger; parigraham—and acceptance of material
things; vimucya—being delivered from; nirmamah—without a sense of
proprietorship; s’c‘mtah—peaceful; brahma-bhﬁyc‘tya—for self-realization;
kalpate—is qualified.

TRANSLATION

Being purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with
determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, being freed from
attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place, who eats little, who
controls his body, mind and power of speech, who is always in trance and who
is detached, free from false ego, false strength, false pride, lust, anger, and
acceptance of material things, free from false proprietorship, and
peaceful—such a person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.

PURPORT

When one is purified by intelligence, he keeps himself in the mode of
goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in trance.
He is not attached to the objects of sense gratification, and he is free from
attachment and hatred in his activities. Such a detached person naturally
prefers to live in a secluded place, he does not eat more than what he requires,
and he controls the activities of his body and mind. He has no false ego
because he does not accept the body as himself. Nor has he a desire to make
the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things. Because he has
no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. He is satisfied with everything
that is offered to him by the grace of the Lord, and he is never angry in the
absence of sense gratification. Nor does he endeavor to acquire sense objects.



Thus when he is completely free from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all
material things, and that is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage
is called the brahma-bhﬁta stage. When one is free from the material
conception of life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated. This is

described in Bbagavad—gité (2.70):

apmyamc‘mam acala—pratistham
samudram c‘tpah pravis’cmti yadvat
tadvat kc‘tmc‘t yam pravis’cmti sarve

sa s’c‘mtim apnoti 11a kc‘tma—kc‘tmi

“A person who is not disturbed by the incessant ﬂow of desires—that enter
like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but is always still—can
alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.”

TEXT 54

Wzmmﬁﬁaﬁrﬁwﬁrl
mzﬁﬂ‘ﬁﬁﬁwﬁmnwu

brahma—bhﬁtah prasannc‘ttmc‘t
11a s’ocati 11a kc‘mksati
samah sarvesu bhﬁtesu

mad-bhaktim labhate parc‘tm

SYNONYMS

brahma-bhﬁtah—being one with the Absolute; prasanna—c‘ttmc‘t—fully joyful;
na—never; s’ocati—laments; na—never; kahksati—desires; samah—equally
disposed; sarvesu—to all; bhﬁtesu—living entities; mat—bhaktim—My
devotional serVice; labhate—gains; parc‘tm—transcendental.

TRANSLATION
One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme



Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have
anything. He is equally disposed toward every living entity. In that state he
attains pure devotional service unto Me.

PURPORT

To the impersonalist, achieving the brahma-bhﬁta stage, becoming one with
the Absolute, is the last word. But for the personalist, or pure devotee, one has
to go still further, to become engaged in pure devotional serVice. This means
that one who is engaged in pure devotional serVice to the Supreme Lord is
already in a state of liberation, called brahma-bhﬁta, oneness with the
Absolute. Without being one with the Supreme, the Absolute, one cannot
render serVice unto Him. In the absolute conception, there is no difference
between the served and the servitor; yet the distinction is there, in a higher
spiritual sense.

In the material concept of life, when one works for sense gratification,
there is misery, but in the absolute world, when one is engaged in pure
devotional serVice, there is no misery. The devotee in Krsna consciousness has
nothing for which to lament or desire. Since God is full, a living entity who is
engaged in God’s serVice, in Krsna consciousness, becomes also full in himself.
He is just like a river cleansed of all dirty water. Because a pure devotee has no
thought other than Krsna, he is naturally always joyful. He does not lament for
any material loss or aspire for gain, because he is full in the serVice of the Lord.
He has no desire for material enjoyment, because he knows that every living
entity is a fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord and therefore
eternally a servant. He does not see, in the material world, someone as higher
and someone as lower; higher and lower positions are ephemeral, and a devotee
has nothing to do with ephemeral appearances or disappearances. For him
stone and gold are of equal value. This is the brahma-bhﬁta stage, and this stage
is attained very easily by the pure devotee. In that stage of existence, the idea
of becoming one with the Supreme Brahman and annihilating one’s
individuality becomes hellish, the idea of attaining the heavenly kingdom
becomes phantasmagoria, and the senses are like serpents’ teeth that are



broken. As there is no fear of a serpent with broken teeth, there is no fear
from the senses when they are automatically controlled. The world is miserable
for the materially infected person, but for a devotee the entire world is as good
as Vaikuntha, or the spiritual sky. The highest personality in this material
universe is no more significant than an ant for a devotee. Such a stage can be
achieved by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, who preached pure devotional serVice
in this age.

TEXT 55

mmﬁamﬁramwfﬁqar—oﬁzl
aa‘rnfaaa‘rwmﬁmn 9911

bhaktyc‘t mam abhijc‘mc‘tti

yc‘wc‘m yas’ cc‘tsmi tattvatah

tato mam tattvato jﬁc‘ttvc‘t
vis’ate tad—anantaram

SYNONYMS

bhaktyc't—by pure devotional serVice; mc‘tm—Me; abhijc'mc'tti—one can know;
yc‘wc‘m—as much as; yah ca asmi—as I am; tattvatah—in truth;
tatah—thereafter; mc‘tm—Me; tattvatah—in truth; jﬁc‘ttvc‘I—knowing;
vis’ate—he enters; tat—anantaram—thereafter.

TRANSLATION

One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such
devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.

PURPORT

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and His plenary portions



cannot be understood by mental speculation nor by the nondevotees. If
anyone wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he has to
take to pure devotional serVice under the guidance of a pure devotee.
Otherwise, the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead will always be
hidden. As already stated in Bbagavad-gita (7.25), nc‘tham prakc‘ts’ah sarvasya:
He is not revealed to everyone. No one can understand God simply by erudite
scholarship or mental speculation. Only one who is actually engaged in Krsna
consciousness and devotional serVice can understand what Krsna is.
University degrees are not helpful.

One who is fully conversant with the Krsna science becomes eligible to
enter into the spiritual kingdom, the abode of Krsna. Becoming Brahman does
not mean that one loses his identity. Devotional serVice is there, and as long as
devotional serVice exists, there must be God, the devotee, and the process of
devotional serVice. Such knowledge is never vanquished, even after liberation.
Liberation involves getting free from the concept of material life; in spiritual
life the same distinction is there, the same individuality is there, but in pure
Krsna consciousness. One should not mistakenly think that the word Uis’ate,
“enters into Me,” supports the monist theory that one becomes homogeneous
with the impersonal Brahman. No. Vi§ate means that one can enter into the
abode of the Supreme Lord in one’s individuality to engage in His association
and render serVice unto Him. For instance, a green bird enters a green tree not
to become one with the tree but to enjoy the fruits of the tree. impersonalists
generally give the example of a river ﬂowing into the ocean and merging. This
may be a source of happiness for the impersonalist, but the personalist keeps
his personal individuality like an aquatic in the ocean. We find so many living
entities within the ocean, if we go deep. Surface acquaintance with the ocean
is not sufficient; one must have complete knowledge of the aquatics living in
the ocean depths.

Because of his pure devotional serVice, a devotee can understand the
transcendental qualities and the opulences of the Supreme Lord in truth. As it
is stated in the Eleventh Chapter, only by devotional serVice can one
understand. The same is confirmed here; one can understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by devotional serVice and enter into His kingdom.



After attainment of the brahma-bhﬁta stage of freedom from material
conceptions, devotional serVice begins by one’s hearing about the Lord. When
one hears about the Supreme Lord, automatically the brahma-bhﬁta stage
develops, and material contamination—greediness and lust for sense
enjoyment—disappears. As lust and desires disappear from the heart of a
devotee, he becomes more attached to the serVice of the Lord, and by such
attachment he becomes free from material contamination. In that state of life
he can understand the Supreme Lord. This is the statement of
Srimad-Bhagavatam also. After liberation the process of bhakti, or
transcendental serVice, continues. The Vedanta-sﬁtra (4.1.12) confirms this:
c‘t—prc‘tyanc‘tt tatrc‘tpi hi drstam. This means that after liberation the process of
devotional serVice continues. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, real devotional
liberation is defined as the reinstatement of the living entity in his own
identity, his own constitutional position. The constitutional position is already
explained: every living entity is a part-and-parcel fragmental portion of the
Supreme Lord. Therefore his constitutional position is to serve. After
liberation, this serVice is never stopped. Actual liberation is getting free from
misconceptions of life.

TEXT 56

WWWWWI
Mmﬁmu 96:11

sarva—karmc‘my api sadc‘t
kurvc‘mo mad—vyapc‘ts’rayah

mat-prasc‘tdc‘td avc‘tpnoti
s’c‘ts’vatam padam avyayam

SYNONYMS

sarva—all; karmani—activities; api—although; sadc‘I—always;
kurvc‘mah—performing; mat—vyapc‘ts’rayah—under My protection;



mat—prasc‘tdc‘tt—by My mercy; avc‘tpnoti—one achieves; s’c‘ts’vatam—the eternal;
padam—abode; avyayam—imperishable.

TRANSLATION

Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My pure devotee, under My
protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.

PURPORT

The word mad-vyapc'ts’myah means under the protection of the Supreme
Lord. To be free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts under the
direction of the Supreme Lord or His representative, the spiritual master.
There is no time limitation for a pure devotee. He is always, twenty-four hours
a day, one hundred percent engaged in activities under the direction of the
Supreme Lord. To a devotee who is thus engaged in Krsna consciousness the
Lord is very, very kind. In spite of all difficulties, he is eventually placed in the
transcendental abode, or Krsnaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is
no doubt about it. In that supreme abode, there is no change; everything is
eternal, imperishable and full of knowledge.

TEXT 57

WWWWWH
Wnﬁﬁmﬁnau 919 II

cetasc‘t sarva-karmc‘mi
mayi scmnyasya mat—pamh
buddhi—yogam upds’ritya
mac-cittah satatam bhava
SYNONYMS

cetasc‘t—by intelligence; sarva—karmc‘mi—all kinds of activities; mayi—unto



Me; sannyasya—giving up; mat-parah—under My protection;
buddhi—yogam—devotional activities; upds’ritya—taking shelter of;
mat-Cittah—in consciousness of Me; satatam—twenty-four hours a day;
bhaUa—just become.

TRANSLATION

In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My protection.
In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.

PURPORT

When one acts in Krsna consciousness, he does not act as the master of the
world. Just like a servant, one should act fully under the direction of the
Supreme Lord. A servant has no individual independence. He acts only on the
order of the master. A servant acting on behalf of the supreme master is
unaffected by profit and loss. He simply discharges his duty faithfully in terms
of the order of the Lord. Now, one may argue that Arjuna was acting under
the personal direction of Krsna but when Krsna is not present how should one
act? If one acts according to the direction of Krsna in this book, as well as
under the guidance of the representative of Krsna, then the result will be the
same. The Sanskrit word mat-parah is very important in this verse. It indicates
that one has no goal in life save and except acting in Krsna consciousness just
to satisfy Krsna. And while working in that way, one should think of Krsna
only: “I have been appointed to discharge this particular duty by Krsna.” While
acting in such a way, one naturally has to think of Krsna. This is perfect Krsna
consciousness. One should, however, note that after doing something
whimsically he should not offer the result to the Supreme Lord. That sort of
duty is not in the devotional serVice of Krsna consciousness. One should act
according to the order of Krsna. This is a very important point. That order of
Krsna comes through disciplic succession from the bona fide spiritual master.
Therefore the spiritual master’s order should be taken as the prime duty of life.
If one gets a bona fide spiritual master and acts according to his direction, then
one’s perfection of life in Krsna consciousness is guaranteed.



TEXT 58

mzmﬁﬁmﬂmﬁwﬁn
aaﬁmwaﬁwﬁrﬁwgﬁruﬁu

mac-cittah sarva—dmgc‘mi
mat—prasc‘tdc‘tt tarisyasi

atha cet tvam ahahkc‘trc‘m
11a s’rosyasi vinahksyasi

SYNONYMS

mat—of Me; cittah—being in consciousness; sarva—all;
durgc‘mi—impediments; mat-prasc‘tdc‘tt—by My mercy; tarisyasi—you will
overcome; atha—but; cet—if; tvam—you; ahahkc‘trc‘tt—by false ego; 11a
s’rosyasi—do not hear; Umahksyasi—you will be lost.

TRANSLATION

If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of
conditioned life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such
consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost.

PURPORT

A person in full Krsna consciousness is not unduly anxious about executing
the duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this great freedom
from all anxiety. For one who acts in Krsna consciousness, Lord Krsna becomes
the most intimate friend. He always looks after His friends comfort, and He
gives Himself to His friend, who is so devotedly engaged working twenty-four
hours a day to please the Lord. Therefore, no one should be carried away by
the false ego of the bodily concept of life. One should not falsely think himself
independent of the laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under



strict material laws. But as soon as he acts in Krsna consciousness, he is
liberated, free from the material perplexities. One should note very carefully
that one who is not active in Krsna consciousness is losing himself in the
material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth and death. No conditioned soul
actually knows what is to be done and what is not to be done, but a person who
acts in Krsna consciousness is free to act because everything is prompted by
Krsna from within and confirmed by the spiritual master.

TEXT 59

Wﬁﬁagﬁrwﬁl
ﬁreﬁqaaamﬁqgﬁmiﬁﬁmﬁrumu

yad ahahkc‘tram c‘ts’ritya
11a yotsya iti manyase

mithyaisa vyavasc‘tyas te

prakrtis wam m'yoksyati

SYNONYMS

yat—if; ahahkc‘tram—of false ego; c‘ts’ritya—taking shelter; 11a yotsye—I shall
not fight; iti—thus; manyase—you think; mithyc‘t esah—this is all false;
vyavasc‘tyah—determination; te—your; prakrtih—material nature; tvc‘tm—you;
niyoksyati—will engage.
TRANSLATION
If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you will

be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged in warfare.

PURPORT

Arjuna was a military man, and born of the nature of the ksatriya.
Therefore his natural duty was to fight. But due to false ego he was fearing that



by killing his teacher, grandfather and friends he would incur sinful reactions.
Actually he was considering himself master of his actions, as if he were
directing the good and bad results of such work. He forgot that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead was present there, instructing him to fight. That is the
forgetfulness of the conditioned soul. The Supreme Personality gives
directions as to what is good and what is bad, and one simply has to act in
Krsna consciousness to attain the perfection of life. No one can ascertain his
destiny as the Supreme Lord can; therefore the best course is to take direction
from the Supreme Lord and act. No one should neglect the order of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead or the order of the spiritual master, who is
the representative of God. One should act unhesitatingly to execute the order
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead—that will keep one safe under all
circumstances.

TEXT 60

WﬁﬁﬂﬁﬁgzﬁﬁWﬁl
ﬁﬁﬁﬁﬂﬁﬁﬁﬁﬂﬁﬁsﬁﬁusou

svabhc‘wa—jena kaunteya
nibaddhah svena karmanc‘t
kartum necchasi yam mohc‘tt
karisyasy avas’o ’pi tat

SYNONYMS

svabhc‘wa—jena—born of your own nature; kaunteya—O son of Kunti;
nibaddhah—conditioned; svena—by your own; karmanc‘t—activities;
kartum—to do; na—not; icchasi—you like; yat—that which; mohc‘tt—by
illusion; karisyasi—you will do; avas’ah—involuntarily; api—even; tat—that.

TRANSLATION
Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction. But,



compelled by the work born of your own nature, you will act all the same, 0
son of Kunti.

PURPORT

If one refuses to act under the direction of the Supreme Lord, then he is
compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone is under the
spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature and is acting in that
way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself under the direction of the
Supreme Lord becomes glorious.

TEXT 61

3813:8311131131323‘183’3818811
WWWWIIS?"

is’varah sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm

th—des’e ’rjuna tisthati
bhrc‘tmaycm sarva—bhﬁtc‘mi

yantrc‘tmdhc‘mi mc‘tyayc‘t

SYNONYMS

is’varah—the Supreme Lord; sarva—bhﬁtc‘mc‘tm—of all living entities;
hTt—des’e—in the location of the heart; arjuna—O Arjuna; tisthati—resides;
bhrc‘tmayan—causing to travel; sarva-bhﬁtc‘mi—all living entities; yantra—on a
machine; c'trﬁdhani—being placed; mc‘tyayc't—under the spell of material
energy.

TRANSLATION

The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, 0 Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine,
made of the material energy.



PURPORT

Arjuna was not the supreme knower, and his decision to fight or not to
fight was confined to his limited discretion. Lord Krsna instructed that the
individual is not all in all. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, or He
Himself, Krsna, as the localized Supersoul, sits in the heart directing the living
being. After changing bodies, the living entity forgets his past deeds, but the
Supersoul, as the knower of the past, present and future, remains the witness
of all his activities. Therefore all the activities of living entities are directed by
this Supersoul. The living entity gets what he deserves and is carried by the
material body, which is created in the material energy under the direction of
the Supersoul. As soon as a living entity is placed in a particular type of body,
he has to work under the spell of that bodily situation. A person seated in a
high-speed motorcar goes faster than one seated in a slower car, though the
living entities, the drivers, may be the same. Similarly, by the order of the
Supreme Soul, material nature fashions a particular type of body to a particular
type of living entity so that he may work according to his past desires. The
living entity is not independent. One should not think himself independent of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The individual is always under the
Lord’s control. Therefore one’s duty is to surrender, and that is the injunction
of the next verse.

TEXT 62

WWWWWI
mwwmmmuaqu

tam eva s’aranam gaccha
sarva-bhdvena bhc‘trata
tat-prasc‘tdc‘tt parc‘tm s’c‘mtim
sthc‘mam prc‘tpsyasi s’c‘ts’vatam



SYNONYMS

tam—unto Him; eva—certainly; s’aranam gaccha—surrender;
sarva-bhc‘wena—in all respects; bhc‘trata—O son of Bharata; tat—prasc‘tdc‘tt—by
His grace; parc‘tm—transcendental; s’c'mtim—peace; sthc‘mam—the abode;
prc‘tpsyasi—you will get; s’c‘ts’vatam—eternal.

TRANSLATION

O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain
transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.

PURPORT

A living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is situated in everyone’s heart, and that will relieve him from all
kinds of miseries of this material existence. By such surrender, not only will
one be released from all miseries in this life, but at the end he will reach the
Supreme God. The transcendental world is described in the Vedic literature
(Rg Veda 1.22.20) as tad Uisnoh paramam padam. Since all of creation is the
kingdom of God, everything material is actually spiritual, but paramam padam
specifically refers to the eternal abode, which is called the spiritual sky or
Vaikuntha.

In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gitc‘t it is stated, sarvasya cc‘tham hrdi
sannivistah: the Lord is seated in everyone’s heart. So this recommendation
that one should surrender unto the Supersoul sitting within means that one
should surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Krsna has
already been accepted by Arjuna as the Supreme. He was accepted in the
Tenth Chapter as param brahma param dhc‘tma. Arjuna has accepted Krsna as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the supreme abode of all living
entities, not only because of his personal experience but also because of the
evidence of great authorities like Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa.



TEXT 63
381331131111831313131133183311311
WHWWVIIQII

iti te jﬁc‘mam dkhydtam
guhyc‘td guhyataram mayc‘t
vimrs’yaitad as’esena
yathecchasi tathd kum

SYNONYMS

iti—thus; te—unto you; jﬁc‘mam—knowledge; c'tkhyc'ttam—described;
guhyc‘It—than confidential; guhya—taram—still more confidential; maya—by
Me; vimrs’ya—deliberating; etat—on this; as’esena—fully; yathc‘t—as;
icchasi—you like; tathc‘I—that; kum—perform.

TRANSLATION

Thus I have explained to you knowledge still more confidential. Deliberate
on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.

PURPORT

The Lord has already explained to Arjuna the knowledge of brahma-bhﬁta.
One who is in the brahma-bhﬁta condition is joyful; he never laments, nor does
he desire anything. That is due to confidential knowledge. Krsna also discloses
knowledge of the Supersoul. This is also Brahman knowledge, knowledge of
Brahman, but it is superior.

Here the words yathecchasi tathd kuru—“As you like, you may
act”—indicate that God does not interfere with the little independence of the
living entity. In Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the Lord has explained in all respects how one
can elevate his living condition. The best advice imparted to Arjuna is to
surrender unto the Supersoul seated within his heart. By right discrimination,



one should agree to act according to the order of the Supersoul. That will help
one become situated constantly in Krsna consciousness, the highest
perfectional stage of human life. Arjuna is being directly ordered by the
Personality of Godhead to fight. Surrender to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is in the best interest of the living entities. It is not for the interest of
the Supreme. Before surrendering, one is free to deliberate on this subject as
far as the intelligence goes; that is the best way to accept the instruction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such instruction comes also through the
spiritual master, the bona fide representative of Krsna.

TEXT 64

91011113116131

83111313111131
sﬁﬁﬁqafﬁrﬁﬁamﬁémuawl

sarva-guhyatamam bhﬁyah
s’mu me paramam vacah
isto ’si me drdham iti
tato vaksyc‘tmi te hitam

SYNONYMS

sarva-guhya—tamam—the most confidential of all; bhﬁyah—again; s’mu—just
hear; me—from Me; paramam—the supreme; vacah—instruction; istah
asi—you are dear; me—to Me; drdham—very; iti—thus; tatah—therefore;
vaksyc‘tmi—I am speaking; te—for your; hitam—benefit.

TRANSLATION

Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme
instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me, for it is
for your benefit.

PURPORT



The Lord has given Arjuna knowledge that is confidential (knowledge of
Brahman) and still more confidential (knowledge of the Supersoul within
everyone’s heart), and now He is giving the most confidential part of
knowledge: just surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the
end of the Ninth Chapter He has said, man-mam‘th: “]ust always think of Me.”
The same instruction is repeated here to stress the essence of the teachings of
Bhagavad-gitc‘t. This essence is not understood by a common man, but by one
who is actually very dear to Krsna, a pure devotee of Krsna. This is the most
important instruction in all Vedic literature. What Krsna is saying in this
connection is the most essential part of knowledge, and it should be carried
out not only by Arjuna but by all living entities.

TEXT 65

1131311131113311131131111131113551
mﬁéwﬁraeiﬁqﬁaﬁfﬁﬁsﬁrﬁuaau

man—mam‘t bhava mad—bhakto
mad—yc‘tji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi satyam te
pratijc‘me priyo ’si me

SYNONYMS

mat-mam‘th—thinking of Me; bhava—just become; mat—bhaktah—My devotee;
mat—yc‘tji—My worshiper; mc‘tm—unto Me; namaskuru—offer your obeisances;
mc‘tm—unto Me; eva—certainly; esyasi—you will come; satyam—truly; te—to
you; pratijc‘me—I promise; priyah—dear; asi—you are; me—to Me.

TRANSLATION

Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your
homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this



because you are My very dear friend.

PURPORT

The most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a pure
devotee of Krsna and always think of Him and act for Him. One should not
become an official meditator. Life should be so molded that one will always
have the chance to think of Krsna. One should always act in such a way that
all his daily activities are in connection with Krsna. He should arrange his life
in such a way that throughout the twenty-four hours he cannot but think of
Krsna. And the Lord’s promise is that anyone who is in such pure Krsna
consciousness will certainly return to the abode of Krsna, where he will be
engaged in the association of Krsna face to face. This most confidential part of
knowledge is spoken to Arjuna because he is the dear friend of Krsna.
Everyone who follows the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend to Krsna
and obtain the same perfection as Arjuna.

These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Krsna—the
very form with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with a beautiful face
and peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptions of Krsna found in the
Brahma-samhitc't and other literatures. One should fix his mind on this original
form of Godhead, Krsna. One should not even divert his attention to other
forms of the Lord. The Lord has multiforms as Visnu, Narayana, Rama,
Varaha, etc., but a devotee should concentrate his mind on the form that was
present before Arjuna. Concentration of the mind on the form of Krsna
constitutes the most confidential part of knowledge, and this is disclosed to
Arjuna because Arjuna is the most dear friend of Krsna’s.

TEXT 66
aﬁmﬁqﬁaamﬁakwfasrl
mwﬁqﬁiﬁﬁaﬁwﬁmﬂazuaau

sarva—dharmc‘m parityajya



mam ekam s’aranam waja
aham wam sarva-pc‘tpebhyo
moksayisyc‘tmi mc‘t s’ucah

SYNONYMS

sarva—dharmc‘m—all varieties of religion; parityajya—abandoning; mc‘tm—unto
Me; ekam—only; s’aranam—for surrender; waja—go; aham—I; tvc‘tm—you;
sarva—all; papebhyah—from sinful reactions; moksayisyc‘tmi—will deliver;
mc‘t—do not; s’ucah—worry.

TRANSLATION

Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver
you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear.

PURPORT

The Lord has described various kinds of knowledge and processes of
religion—knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, knowledge of the Supersoul,
knowledge of the different types of orders and statuses of social life, knowledge
of the renounced order of life, knowledge of nonattachment, sense and mind
control, meditation, etc. He has described in so many ways different types of
religion. Now, in summarizing Bhagavad-gitc‘t, the Lord says that Arjuna should
give up all the processes that have been explained to him; he should simply
surrender to Krsna. That surrender will save him from all kinds of sinful
reactions, for the Lord personally promises to protect him.

In the Seventh Chapter it was said that only one who has become free from
all sinful reactions can take to the worship of Lord Krsna. Thus one may think
that unless he is free from all sinful reactions he cannot take to the
surrendering process. To such doubts it is here said that even if one is not free
from all sinful reactions, simply by the process of surrendering to Sri Krsna he
is automatically freed. There is no need of strenuous effort to free oneself from
sinful reactions. One should unhesitatingly accept Krsna as the supreme saVior



of all living entities. With faith and love, one should surrender unto Him.
The process of surrender to Krsna is described in the Hari—bllakti-Vilésa

(11.676):

c‘mukﬁlyasya sahkalpah
prc‘ttikﬁlyasya varjanam
raksisyatiti vi§vdso
goptrtve varanam tathd
c‘ttma-niksepa—kc‘trpanye
sad—vidhc‘t s’aranc‘tgatih

According to the devotional process, one should simply accept such
religious principles that will lead ultimately to the devotional serVice of the
Lord. One may perform a particular occupational duty according to his
position in the social order, but if by executing his duty one does not come to
the point of Krsna consciousness, all his activities are in vain. Anything that
does not lead to the perfectional stage of Krsna consciousness should be
avoided. One should be confident that in all circumstances Krsna will protect
him from all difficulties. There is no need of thinking how one should keep the
body and soul together. Krsna will see to that. One should always think himself
helpless and should consider Krsna the only basis for his progress in life. As
soon as one seriously engages himself in devotional serVice to the Lord in full
Krsna consciousness, at once he becomes freed from all contamination of
material nature. There are different processes of religion and purificatory
processes by cultivation of knowledge, meditation in the mystic yoga system,
etc., but one who surrenders unto Krsna does not have to execute so many
methods. That simple surrender unto Krsna will save him from unnecessarily
wasting time. One can thus make all progress at once and be freed from all
sinful reactions.

One should be attracted by the beautiful Vision of Krsna. His name is Krsna
because He is all-attractive. One who becomes attracted by the beautiful,
all-powerful, omnipotent Vision of Krsna is fortunate. There are different
kinds of transcendentalists—some of them are attached to the impersonal
Brahman Vision, some of them are attracted by the Supersoul feature, etc., but



one who is attracted to the personal feature of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and, above all, one who is attracted by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as Krsna Himself, is the most perfect transcendentalist. In other
words, devotional serVice to Krsna, in full consciousness, is the most
confidential part of knowledge, and this is the essence of the whole
Bhagavad—gitc‘t. Karma—yogis, empiric philosophers, mystics and devotees are all
called transcendentalists, but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all. The
particular words used here, 11151 s’ucah, “Don’t fear, don’t hesitate, don’t worry,”
are very significant. One may be perplexed as to how one can give up all kinds
of religious forms and simply surrender unto Krsna, but such worry is useless.

TEXT 67

aﬁmwml
3319135333333111'3192113113113191

idam te nc‘ttapaskc‘tya
nc‘tbhaktc‘tya kadc‘tcana
11a cc‘ts’us’rﬁsave vc‘tcyam
11a ca mam yo ’bhyasﬁyati

SYNONYMS

idam—this; te—by you; na—never; atapaskc‘tya—to one who is not austere;
na—never; abhaktc‘tya—to one who is not a devotee; kadc‘tccma—at any time;
na—never; ca—also; as’us’TIZsaUe—to one who is not engaged in devotional
service; vc‘tcyam—to be spoken; na—never; ca—also; mc‘tm—toward Me;
yah—anyone who; abhyasﬁyati—is envious.

TRANSLATION

This confidential knowledge may never be explained to those who are not
austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one who is envious

of Me.



PURPORT

Persons who have not undergone the austerities of the religious process,
who have never attempted devotional serVice in Krsna consciousness, who
have not tended a pure devotee, and especially those who are conscious of
Krsna only as a historical personality or who are envious of the greatness of
Krsna should not be told this most confidential part of knowledge. It is,
however, sometimes found that even demoniac persons who are envious of
Krsna, worshiping Krsna in a different way, take to the profession of
explaining Bhagavad-gitc‘t in a different way to make business, but anyone who
desires actually to understand Krsna must avoid such commentaries on
Bhagavad—gitc‘t. Actually the purpose of Bhagavad-gitc‘t is not understandable to
those who are sensuous. Even if one is not sensuous but is strictly following the
disciplines enjoined in the Vedic scripture, if he is not a devotee he also
cannot understand Krsna. And even when one poses himself as a devotee of
Krsna but is not engaged in Krsna conscious activities, he also cannot
understand Krsna. There are many persons who envy Krsna because He has
explained in Bhagavad-gitc‘t that He is the Supreme and that nothing is above
Him or equal to Him. There are many persons who are envious of Krsna. Such
persons should not be told of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, for they cannot understand.
There is no possibility of faithless persons’ understanding Bhagavad-gitc‘t and
Krsna. Without understanding Krsna from the authority of a pure devotee,
one should not try to comment upon Bhagavad-gitc‘t.

TEXT 68
31 st." 11311 3131 W I
ﬁﬁsnﬁwwmﬁmz || s= Il
ya idam paramam guhyam

mad—bhaktesv abhidhc‘tsyati
bhaktim mayi parc‘tm krtvc‘t



mam evaisyaty asams’ayah

SYNONYMS

yah—anyone who; idam—this; paramam—most; guhyam—confidential secret;
mat—of Mine; bhaktesu—amongst devotees; abhidhc‘tsyati—explains;
bhaktim—devotional serVice; mayi—unto Me; parc‘tm—transcendental;
krtvc‘t—doing; mc‘tm—unto Me; eva—certainly; esyati—comes;
asams’ayah—without doubt.

TRANSLATION

For one who explains this supreme secret to the devotees, pure devotional
service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.

PURPORT

Generally it is advised that Bhagavad-gitc‘t be discussed amongst the
devotees only, for those who are not devotees will understand neither Krsna
nor Bhagavad-gitc‘t. Those who do not accept Krsna as He is and Bhagavad-gitc‘t
as it is should not try to explain Bhagavad-gitc‘t whimsically and become
offenders. Bhagavad-gitc‘t should be explained to persons who are ready to
accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is a subject matter for
the devotees only and not for philosophical speculators. Anyone, however,
who tries sincerely to present Bhagavad-gitc‘t as it is will advance in devotional
activities and reach the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such pure
devotion, he is sure to go back home, back to Godhead.

TEXT 69

HHWWWH
Waaﬁamm:f§ﬂaﬁﬁﬁllﬁﬂll

11a ca tasmc‘m manusyesu



kas’cin me priya—krttamah
bhavitc‘t 11a ca me tasmc‘td
anyah priyataro bhuvi

SYNONYMS

na—never; ca—and; tasmc‘It—than him; manusyesu—among men;
kas’cit—anyone; me—to Me; priya—th—tamah—more dear; bhavitc‘I—will
become; na—nor; ca—and; me—to Me; tasmc‘It—than him; anyah—another;
priya—tarah—dearer; bhuvi—in this world.

TRANSLATION

There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there
ever be one more dear.

TEXT 70

31133333311821sz
311333133313118811111311313121119011

adhyesyate ca ya imam
dharmyam samvc‘tdam c‘wayoh

jﬁc‘ma—yajﬁena tenc‘tham

istah syc‘tm iti me matih

SYNONYMS

adhyesyate—will study; ca—also; yah—he who; imam—this;
dharmyam—sacred; samvc‘tdam—conversation; c‘wayoh—of ours; jﬁc‘ma—of
knowledge; yajﬁena—by the sacrifice; tena—by him; aham—I;
istah—worshiped; syc‘Im—shall be; iti—thus; me—My; matih—opinion.

TRANSLATION



And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation of ours worships
Me by his intelligence.

TEXT 71

mawﬁﬁﬁmn
31151111319: 911W" 199 ||

s’raddhc‘wc‘m anasﬁyas’ ca
s’muyc‘td api yo narah
so ’pi muktah s’ubhc‘tl lokc‘m
prc‘tpnuyc‘tt punya—karmanc‘tm

SYNONYMS

s’raddhc‘t—vc‘m—faithful; anasﬁyah—not envious; ca—and; s’muyc‘tt—does hear;
api—certainly; yah—who; narah—a man; sah—he; api—also; muktah—being
liberated; s’ubhc‘m—the auspicious; lokc‘m—planets; prc‘tpnuyc‘tt—he attains;
punya—karmanc‘tm—of the pious.

TRANSLATION

And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful
reactions and attains to the auspicious planets where the pious dwell.

PURPORT

In the siXty-seventh verse of this chapter, the Lord explicitly forbade the
Gita’s being spoken to those who are envious of the Lord. In other words,
Bhagavad-gitc‘t is for the devotees only. But it so happens that sometimes a
devotee of the Lord will hold open class, and in that class not all the students
are expected to be devotees. Why do such persons hold open class? It is
explained here that although not everyone is a devotee, still there are many
men who are not envious of Krsna. They have faith in Him as the Supreme



Personality of Godhead. If such persons hear from a bona fide devotee about
the Lord, the result is that they become at once free from all sinful reactions
and after that attain to the planetary system where all righteous persons are
situated. Therefore simply by hearing Bhagavad-gitc‘t, even a person who does
not try to be a pure devotee attains the result of righteous activities. Thus a
pure devotee of the Lord gives everyone a chance to become free from all
sinful reactions and to become a devotee of the Lord.

Generally those who are free from sinful reactions, those who are righteous,
very easily take to Krsna consciousness. The word punya-karmanc‘tm is very
significant here. This refers to the performance of great sacrifices, like the
as’vamedha-yajﬁa, mentioned in the Vedic literature. Those who are righteous
in performing devotional serVice but who are not pure can attain the planetary
system of the polestar, or Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva Maharaja is presiding. He
is a great devotee of the Lord, and he has a special planet, which is called the
polestar.

TEXT 72

WWWWWI
38331331311321.219151333331 193 II

kaccid etac chrutam pc‘trtha
tvayaikc‘tgrena cetasc‘t
kaccid ajﬁc‘ma—sammohah
pranastas te dhanaﬁjaya

SYNONYMS

kaccit—whether; etat—this; s’rutam—heard; pc‘trtha—O son of Prtha;
tvayc‘I—by you; eka-agrena—with full attention; cetasc‘t—by the mind;
kaccit—whether; ajﬁc‘ma—of ignorance; sammohah—the illusion;
pranastah—dispelled; te—of you; dhanaﬁjaya—O conqueror of wealth
(Arjuna).



TRANSLATION

0 son of Prtha, O conqueror of wealth, have you heard this with an
attentive mind? And are your ignorance and illusions now dispelled?

PURPORT

The Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was His
duty to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the whole Bhagavad-gitc‘t
in its proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready to re-explain any point, or
the whole Bhagavad-gitc‘t if so required. Actually, anyone who hears
Bhagavad-gitc‘t from a bona fide spiritual master like Krsna or His
representative will find that all his ignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gitc‘t is not
an ordinary book written by a poet or fiction writer; it is spoken by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Any person fortunate enough to hear these
teachings from Krsna or from His bona fide spiritual representative is sure to
become a liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.

TEXT 73

arjuna uvc‘tca
nasto mohah smrtir labdhc‘t
tvat-prasc‘tdc‘m mayacyuta
sthito ’smi gata—scmdehah
karisye vacanam tava

SYNONYMS

arjunah uvc‘tca—Arjuna said; nastah—dispelled; mohah—illusion;



smrtih—memory; labdhc‘t—regained; tvat-prasc‘tdc‘tt—by Your mercy; maya—by
me; acyuta—O infallible Krsna; sthitah—situated; asmi—I am; gata—removed;
sandehah—all doubts; karisye—I shall execute; vacanam—order; tava—Your.

TRANSLATION

Arjuna said: My dear Krsna, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone. I
have regained my memory by Your mercy. I am now firm and free from doubt
and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.

PURPORT

The constitutional position of a living entity, represented by Arjuna, is that
he has to act according to the order of the Supreme Lord. He is meant for
self-discipline. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that the actual position of the
living entity is that of eternal servant of the Supreme Lord. Forgetting this
principle, the living entity becomes conditioned by material nature, but in
serving the Supreme Lord he becomes the liberated servant of God. The living
entity’s constitutional position is to be a servitor; he has to serve either the
illusory mc‘tyc't or the Supreme Lord. If he serves the Supreme Lord he is in his
normal condition, but if he prefers to serve the illusory, external energy, then
certainly he will be in bondage. In illusion the living entity is serving in this
material world. He is bound by his lust and desires, yet he thinks of himself as
the master of the world. This is called illusion. When a person is liberated, his
illusion is over, and he voluntarily surrenders unto the Supreme to act
according to His desires. The last illusion, the last snare of mc‘tyc't to trap the
living entity, is the proposition that he is God. The living entity thinks that he
is no longer a conditioned soul, but God. He is so unintelligent that he does
not think that if he were God, then how could he be in doubt? That he does
not consider. So that is the last snare of illusion. Actually to become free from
the illusory energy is to understand Krsna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and agree to act according to His order.

The word moha is very important in this verse. Moha refers to that which is
opposed to knowledge. Actually real knowledge is the understanding that



every living being is eternally a servitor of the Lord, but instead of thinking
oneself in that position, the living entity thinks that he is not a servant, that
he is the master of this material world, for he wants to lord it over the material
nature. That is his illusion. This illusion can be overcome by the mercy of the
Lord or by the mercy of a pure devotee. When that illusion is over, one agrees
to act in Krsna consciousness.

Krsna consciousness is acting according to Krsna’s order. A conditioned
soul, illusioned by the external energy of matter, does not know that the
Supreme Lord is the master who is full of knowledge and who is the proprietor
of everything. Whatever He desires He can bestow upon His devotees; He is
the friend of everyone, and He is especially inclined to His devotee. He is the
controller of this material nature and of all living entities. He is also the
controller of inexhaustible time, and He is full of all opulences and all
potencies. The Supreme Personality of Godhead can even give Himself to the
devotee. One who does not know Him is under the spell of illusion; he does
not become a devotee, but a servitor of mc‘tyc't. Arjuna, however, after hearing
Bhagavad-gitc‘t from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, became free from all
illusion. He could understand that Krsna was not only his friend but the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. And he understood Krsna factually. So to
study Bhagavad-gitc‘t is to understand Krsna factually. When a person is in full
knowledge, he naturally surrenders to Krsna. When Arjuna understood that it
was Krsna’s plan to reduce the unnecessary increase of population, he agreed
to fight according to Krsna’s desire. He again took up his weapons—his arrows
and bow—to fight under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

TEXT 74

3131313311311
saéaraﬁaamﬁaamzl
WWWWIIB8II

saﬁjaya uvc‘tca
ity aham vc‘tsudevasya



pc‘trthasya ca mahc‘ttmanah
samvc‘tdam imam as’rausam
adbhutam roma—harsanam

SYNONYMS

saﬁjayah uvc‘tca—Saﬁjaya said; iti—thus; aham—I; vc‘tsudevasya—of Krsna;
pc‘trthasya—and Arjuna; ca—also; mahc‘I—c‘ttmanah—of the great soul;
samvc‘tdam—discussion; imam—this; as’rausam—have heard;
adbhutam—wonderful; roma—harsanam—making the hair stand on end.

TRANSLATION

Saﬁjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls, Krsna
and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is standing on end.

PURPORT

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gitc‘t, Dhrtarastra inquired from his secretary
Saﬁjaya, “What happened on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra?” The entire study
was related to the heart of Saﬁjaya by the grace of his spiritual master, Vyasa.
He thus explained the theme of the battlefield. The conversation was
wonderful because such an important conversation between two great souls
had never taken place before and would not take place again. It was wonderful
because the Supreme Personality of Godhead was speaking about Himself and
His energies to the living entity, Arjuna, a great devotee of the Lord. If we
follow in the footsteps of Arjuna to understand Krsna, then our life will be
happy and successful. Saﬁjaya realized this, and as he began to understand it,
he related the conversation to Dhrtarastra. Now it is concluded that wherever
there is Krsna and Arjuna, there is Victory.

TEXT 75
alaqalalﬁaalﬁaaggana [1311 |



31131 ﬁﬁammwma: 13131111 199 ||

vyc‘tsa—prasc‘tdt‘tc chrutavc‘m
etad guhyam aham param
yogam yoges’varc‘tt krsnc‘tt
sc‘tksc‘tt kathayatah svayam

SYNONYMS

vyc‘tsa-prasc‘tdt‘tt—by the mercy of Vyasadeva; s’rutavc‘m—have heard; etat—this;
guhyam—confidential; aham—I; param—the supreme; yogam—mysticism;
yoga-is’varc‘tt—from the master of all mysticism; krsnc‘tt—from Krsna;
sc‘tksc‘It—directly; kathayatah—speaking; svayam—personally.

TRANSLATION

By the mercy of Vyasa, I have heard these most confidential talks directly
from the master of all mysticism, Krsna, who was speaking personally to
Arjuna.

PURPORT

Vyasa was the spiritual master of Saﬁjaya, and Saﬁjaya admits that it was by
Vyasa’s mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
This means that one has to understand Krsna not directly but through the
medium of the spiritual master. The spiritual master is the transparent
medium, although it is true that the experience is still direct. This is the
mystery of the disciplic succession. When the spiritual master is bona fide,
then one can hear Bhagavad-gitc‘t directly, as Arjuna heard it. There are many
mystics and yogis all over the world, but Krsna is the master of all yoga systems.
Krsna’s instruction is explicitly stated in Bhagavad-gitc‘t—surrender unto
Krsna. One who does so is the topmost yogi. This is confirmed in the last verse
of the Sixth Chapter. Yoginc‘tm api sarvesc‘tm.

Narada is the direct disciple of Krsna and the spiritual master of Vyasa.



Therefore Vyasa is as bona fide as Arjuna because he comes in the disciplic
succession, and Saﬁjaya is the direct disciple of Vyasa. Therefore by the grace
of Vyasa, Saﬁjaya’s senses were purified, and he could see and hear Krsna
directly. One who directly hears Krsna can understand this confidential
knowledge. If one does not come to the disciplic succession, he cannot hear
Krsna; therefore his knowledge is always imperfect, at least as far as
understanding Bhagavad-gitc‘t is concerned.

In Bhagavad-gitc‘t, all the yoga systems—karma—yoga, jﬁc‘ma—yoga and
bhakti-yoga—are explained. Krsna is the master of all such mysticism. It is to
be understood, however, that as Arjuna was fortunate enough to understand
Krsna directly, so, by the grace of Vyasa, Saﬁjaya was also able to hear Krsna
directly. Actually there is no difference between hearing directly from Krsna
and hearing directly from Krsna Via a bona fide spiritual master like Vyasa.
The spiritual master is the representative of Vyasadeva also. Therefore,
according to the Vedic system, on the birthday of the spiritual master the
disciples conduct the ceremony called Vyasa-puja.

Wzgudmﬁaggtigz || 195 II

rc‘tjcm samsmrtya samsmrtya

samvc‘tdam imam adbhutam
kes’avc‘trjunayoh punyam
hrsyc‘tmi ca muhur muhuh

SYNONYMS

rc‘tjcm—O King; samsmrtya—remembering; samsmrtya—remembering;
samvc‘tdam—message; imam—this; adbhutam—wonderful; kes’ava—of Lord
Krsna; arjunayoh—and Arjuna; punyam—pious; hrsyc‘tmi—I am taking
pleasure; ca—also; muhuh muhuh—repeatedly.



TRANSLATION

0 King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between
Krsna and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.

PURPORT

The understanding of Bhagavad-gitc‘t is so transcendental that anyone who
becomes conversant with the topics of Arjuna and Krsna becomes righteous
and he cannot forget such talks. This is the transcendental position of spiritual
life. In other words, one who hears the Gitc't from the right source, directly
from Krsna, attains full Krsna consciousness. The result of Krsna
consciousness is that one becomes increasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life
with a thrill, not only for some time, but at every moment.

TEXT 77

aaa’aeaa’aﬁmﬁﬁu
Wﬁnzmwﬁagazng || 1919 ||

tac ca samsmrtya samsmrtya

rﬁpam aty—adbhutam hareh
vismayo me mahc‘m rc‘tjcm
hrsyc‘tmi ca punah punah

SYNONYMS

tat—that; ca—also; samsmrtya—remembering; samsmrtya—remembering;
rﬁpam—form; ati—greatly; adbhutam—wonderful; hareh—of Lord Krsna;
vismayah—wonder; me—my; mahc‘m—great; rc‘tjcm—O King; hrsyc‘tmi—I am
enjoying; ca—also; punah punah—repeatedly.

TRANSLATION



0 King, as I remember the wonderful form of Lord Krsna, I am struck with
wonder more and more, and I rejoice again and again.

PURPORT

It appears that Saﬁjaya also, by the grace of Vyasa, could see the universal
form Krsna exhibited to Arjuna. It is, of course, said that Lord Krsna had
never exhibited such a form before. It was exhibited to Arjuna only, yet some
great devotees could also see the universal form of Krsna when it was shown to
Arjuna, and Vyasa was one of them. He is one of the great devotees of the
Lord, and he is considered to be a powerful incarnation of Krsna. Vyasa
disclosed this to his disciple Saﬁjaya, who remembered that wonderful form of
Krsna exhibited to Arjuna and enjoyed it repeatedly.

TEXT 78

13131111813W313rmaﬁa$ﬁn
313%11133131113132311311111113111‘311 M II

yatra yoges’varah krsno
yatra pc‘trtho dhanm—dharah
tatra s’rir vijayo bhﬁtir
dhruvc‘t nitir matir mama

SYNONYMS

yatra—where; yoga—is’varah—the master of mysticism; krsnah—Lord Krsna;
yatra—where; pc‘trthah—the son of Prtha; dhcmuh—dharah—the carrier of the
bow and arrow; tatTa—there; s’rih—opulence; Vijayah—Victory;
thZtih—exceptional power; dhruvc‘t—certain; nitih—morality; matih
mama—my opinion.

TRANSLATION



Wherever there is Krsna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is
Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, Victory,
extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.

PURPORT

The Bhagavad-gitc‘t began with an inquiry of Dhrtarastra’s. He was hopeful
of the Victory of his sons, assisted by great warriors like Bhisma, Drona and
Karna. He was hopeful that the Victory would be on his side. But after
describing the scene on the battlefield, Saﬁjaya told the King, “You are
thinking of Victory, but my opinion is that where Krsna and Arjuna are
present, there will be all good fortune.” He directly confirmed that Dhrtarastra
could not expect Victory for his side. Victory was certain for the side of Arjuna
because Krsna was there. Krsna’s acceptance of the post of charioteer for
Arjuna was an exhibition of another opulence. Krsna is full of all opulences,
and renunciation is one of them. There are many instances of such
renunciation, for Krsna is also the master of renunciation.

The fight was actually between Duryodhana and Yudhisthira. Arjuna was
fighting on behalf of his elder brother, Yudhisthira. Because Krsna and Arjuna
were on the side of Yudhisthira, Yudhisthira’s Victory was certain. The battle
was to decide who would rule the world, and Saﬁjaya predicted that the power
would be transferred to Yudhisthira. It is also predicted here that Yudhisthira,
after gaining Victory in this battle, would ﬂourish more and more because not
only was he righteous and pious but he was also a strict moralist. He never
spoke a lie during his life.

There are many less intelligent persons who take Bhagavad-gitc‘t to be a
discussion of topics between two friends on a battlefield. But such a book
cannot be scripture. Some may protest that Krsna incited Arjuna to fight,
which is immoral, but the reality of the situation is clearly stated:
Bhagavad-gitc‘t is the supreme instruction in morality. The supreme instruction
of morality is stated in the Ninth Chapter, in the thirty-fourth verse:
man—mcmc‘t bhava mad—bhaktah. One must become a devotee of Krsna, and the
essence of all religion is to surrender unto Krsna (sarva—dharmc‘m parityajya



mam ekam s’aranam waja). The instructions of Bhagavad-gitc‘t constitute the
supreme process of religion and of morality. All other processes may be
purifying and may lead to this process, but the last instruction of the Gitc't is
the last word in all morality and religion: surrender unto Krsna. This is the
verdict of the Eighteenth Chapter.

From Bhagavad-gitc‘t we can understand that to realize oneself by
philosophical speculation and by meditation is one process, but to fully
surrender unto Krsna is the highest perfection. This is the essence of the
teachings of Bhagavad-gitc‘t. The path of regulative principles according to the
orders of social life and according to the different courses of religion may be a
confidential path of knowledge. But although the rituals of religion are
confidential, meditation and cultivation of knowledge are still more
confidential. And surrender unto Krsna in devotional serVice in full Krsna
consciousness is the most confidential instruction. That is the essence of the
Eighteenth Chapter.

Another feature of Bhagavad-gitc‘t is that the actual truth is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna. The Absolute Truth is realized in three
features—impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma, and ultimately the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Perfect knowledge of the Absolute
Truth means perfect knowledge of Krsna. If one understands Krsna, then all
the departments of knowledge are part and parcel of that understanding.
Krsna is transcendental, for He is always situated in His eternal internal
potency. The living entities are manifested of His energy and are divided into
two classes, eternally conditioned and eternally liberated. Such living entities
are innumerable, and they are considered fundamental parts of Krsna.
Material energy is manifested into twenty-four divisions. The creation is
effected by eternal time, and it is created and dissolved by external energy.
This manifestation of the cosmic world repeatedly becomes Visible and
invisible.

In Bhagavad-gitc‘t five principal subject matters have been discussed: the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, material nature, the living entities, eternal
time and all kinds of activities. All is dependent on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna. All conceptions of the Absolute Truth—impersonal



Brahman, localized Paramatma and any other transcendental
conception—exist within the category of understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Although superficially the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the living entity, material nature and time appear to be different,
nothing is different from the Supreme. But the Supreme is always different
from everything. Lord Caitanya’s philosophy is that of “inconceivable oneness
and difference.” This system of philosophy constitutes perfect knowledge of
the Absolute Truth.

The living entity in his original position is pure spirit. He is just like an
atomic particle of the Supreme Spirit. Thus Lord Krsna may be compared to
the sun, and the living entities to sunshine. Because the living entities are the
marginal energy of Krsna, they have a tendency to be in contact either with
the material energy or with the spiritual energy. In other words, the living
entity is situated between the two energies of the Lord, and because he belongs
to the superior energy of the Lord, he has a particle of independence. By
proper use of that independence he comes under the direct order of Krsna.
Thus he attains his normal condition in the pleasure-giVing potency.

Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighteenth Chapter of the Srimad

Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Conclusion—the Perfection of Renunciation.



Bhagavad-gita AS It IS, translated with purports by

His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedama Swami Prabhupada,

is available from the publishers Via Krishnacom in various formats,
including deluxe print edition with color paintings, audio book on
CD, and interactive DVD edition.

We carry all of the books translated by His Divine Grace, including
Srimad—Bhagavatam, Caitanya-Carl'tamrl'ta,

Krsna - The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Nectar ofDevotl'on,
Nectar oflnstruction, Sri Isopam'sad, Teachings ofLord Chaitanya,
and more.



